<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 PUBLIC "-//TEI//DTD TEI Lite 1.0//EN" [







































]>







------
FIGURE

Newly Designed Front Cover.
------








------
FIGURE

Original Title Page.
------







ORIGINES
ISLANDICAE

A COLLECTION OF THE MORE IMPORTANT SAGAS
AND OTHER NATIVE WRITINGS RELATING
TO THE SETTLEMENT AND EARLY
HISTORY OF ICELAND



EDITED AND TRANSLATED

BY

GUDBRAND VIGFUSSON

AND

F. YORK POWELL




VOL. I

OXFORD
AT THE CLARENDON PRESS
1905








HENRY FROWDE, M.A.
PUBLISHER TO THE UNIVERSITY OF OXFORD
LONDON, EDINBURGH
NEW YORK AND TORONTO


PRINTED IN ENGLAND







HOC OPVS

GVDBRANDO VIGFVSSON
FREDERICO YORK POWELL

ET AMICITIA ET STVDIORVM COMMVNITATE CONIVNCTIS
LITTERARVM ISLANDICARVM PERITISSIMIS
DEDICANT DELEGATI PRELI
VNIV. OXON.
DESIDERII OBSERVANTIAE TESTIMONIVM






PREFATORY NOTE.


In these volumes the joint Editors, whose lamented death leaves the
work without the final touches which they only could have given
to it, aimed at bringing together, and making accessible to the
English reader, all the important texts relating to the colonization
and early history of Iceland. Even if these writings had no wider
interest, there would still be much in them capable of attracting
and retaining the attention of all who care for the study of ancient
customs, or take pleasure in picturesque glimpses of the past. Among
the mediaeval literatures of Europe that of Iceland is unrivalled in
the profusion of detail with which the facts of ordinary life are
recorded, and the clearness with which the individual character of
numberless real persons stands out from the historic background. But
in addition to these intrinsic merits, the historical materials
here collected have a further claim to be favourably received by
the English-speaking world. The Icelanders of the saga-age were not
a secluded self-centred race; they were untiring in their desire to
learn all that could be known of the lands round about them, and it
is to their zeal for this knowledge, their sound historical sense,
and their trained memories, that we owe much information regarding the
British Isles themselves from the ninth to the thirteenth century. The
contact of the Scandinavian peoples with the English race on the one
hand, and the Gaelic on the other, has been an important factor in
the subsequent history of Britain; and this is naturally a subject on
which the Icelandic evidence, much of which is given in these pages,
is of the highest value.

In a collection of Icelandic texts like the present, no strict
chronological order is possible: so rapid was the growth of a
written literature during the twelfth century, and so uncertain is
the authorship of almost every separate work, that in most cases only
approximate dates can be assigned, and even these are often founded
on evidence which may be fallacious. The arrangement which has been
adopted is therefore based on the leading divisions into which the
work naturally falls, beginning with the general and ending with the
particular. First of all come those texts which give a comprehensive
view of the early settlers, their original homes and family connexions
in Norway or the Western Isles, the reasons and manner of their
departure for Iceland, the place of their settlement there, and
their most notable descendants. For all this the prime authority is
the special history of the colonization, Landnámabóc, often no more
than a bare catalogue of persons and places, but every now and then
enlivening the long lists of names with short anecdotes or scraps of
verse. No other work is so thoroughly representative of that unwearied
interest in personal and local details which was characteristic of
Icelanders in the past, and is by no means extinct at the present
day. To this primary source some other materials of the same kind have
been added by way of supplement, including the account of the Thorsness
settlement from Eyrbyggja Saga, which is especially valuable for the
information it gives as to the old heathen worship and religious ideas.

In the Second Book an attempt is made to show under what customs and
laws the new settlement started and continued to exist. Here the basis
is Are's brief but all-important Libellus or Íslendingabóc, by which
the section is linked to Landnáma on the one hand, and to Cristne
Saga on the other. This little treatise, excerpted by Are himself
from a longer work now lost, is remarkable not only for the amount
of information packed into its few pages, but also for the scrupulous
care with which the various statements are authenticated by reference
to unimpeachable authorities. In the section on 'Primitive Laws and
Customs' many curious items have been brought together, in some of
which the old-world air is obvious and of rare interest. Much of this
naturally disappeared when Iceland gave up its old religion, a story
briefly related by Are and told in fuller detail in Cristne Saga, with
which the Third Book commences. In this and the texts which follow it
the history is carried far beyond the early days of the settlement;
but the period is important as that in which historical tradition
assumed a written form. The lives of the bishops also contain much
that is interesting, either in itself or by way of contrast with the
stirring times of the tenth century. A slight contact with the British
Isles is even found in the voyage of Bishop Godmund (pp. 613-15).

It is probably in the second volume that the general reader will
find the most attractive matter, and will obtain the clearest idea
of the nature of Icelandic saga-writing. Here are given the stories
of famous Icelanders of the tenth century, especially such parts
of them as appear to have a real historic basis, or are valuable
as records of early customs. In addition to these features, some of
them possess literary merits which place them in the front rank of
mediaeval literature. The completeness with which these biographies
cover the greater portion of the island is in itself clear evidence of
the zeal with which the whole Icelandic race combined to maintain a
living knowledge of the past. The form, too, which the tradition has
in many cases assumed, shows that to remarkable tenacity of memory
there were united a creative imagination and an artistic sense of
a very high order. Despite the similarity of form which obtains in
these sagas, there is much diversity in tone and treatment, no less
in the language than in the matter of the tale. Some, like Vatzdæla,
consist merely of a succession of loosely connected episodes, often
covering the lives of several generations; others, like Hrafnkels
Saga, are neatly rounded tales, working to a natural but not always
expected climax. Although some of the more famous sagas, such as
Nial's and Gretti's, fall outside the scope of the present work,
those which have been included are fully sufficient to show how fine
an art that of saga-telling had become in Iceland.

In the Fifth Book the centre of interest shifts from Iceland itself
to its colony Greenland, and (in the Wineland Voyages) to the eastern
coast of North America. The narratives relating to the latter are
more generally known; the accounts of Greenland in the stories
of Thorgils and Thormod will probably be new to most readers, and
contain many curious glimpses of life in these outlying parts of the
Scandinavian world.

In the introductory matter prefixed to each text all important details
relating to its origin, character, and history, have been duly noted
and discussed. Much of this will be found to be either supplementary
or corrective to the briefer accounts given in the 'Prolegomena'
to the Oxford edition of Sturlunga Saga (1878), to which the reader
may turn for a general account of the older Icelandic literature.






CONTENTS.



BOOK I.
                                                                  PAGE
SETTLEMENT AND SETTLERS                                              1


    § 1. Landnama-book, or the Book of Settlements              2
    § 2. Early Genealogies from Sagas
    237
    § 3. The Thorsness Settlement
    252
    § 4. Mantissa
    266

        The Tale of Garmund Hell-skin
        274



BOOK II.
THE OLD CONSTITUTION                                               278


    § 1. Libellus Islandorum                                  279
    § 2. Primitive Laws and Customs
    307
    § 3. Early Constitutional Law
    334
    § 4. Nial and the Fifth Court
    363



BOOK III.
CONVERSION AND EARLY CHURCH OF ICELAND                             369


    § 1. Cristne Saga                                         370

        The Tale of Thorwald the Far-farer
        407

    § 2. Early Church Legends (Swade and the Poor; Thorhall Knop;
    the Tale of Thidrande)                                       413
    § 3. The Lives of the First Seven Bishops of Scalholt
    420

        Hungrvaca                                                 425
        Þorláks Saga                                              458
        Póls Saga                                                 502

    § 4. S. John of Holar's Life (Ioans Saga)                 534
    § 5. Second Life of Thorlac (Oddaverja-Þáttr)             567
    § 6. Fragments from Gunlaug's Life of S. John of Holar
    591
    § 7. Biographica Minora
    594

        Tales of Bishop Islaf
        595
        Of Bishop Gizor
        596
        Bishop Magnus and King Gilchrist
        596
        Of Cetil and Haflide
        598
        The Election of Bishop Godmund of Holar
        601

    § 8. Law Ecclesiastic
    616
    § 9. Church Charters
    624



The Later Genealogies appended to Landnáma-bóc                     639

Index of Persons                                                   643

Index of Places                                                    700








CORRIGENDA.



[**TODO: Verify table]
PAGE
3,     l. 1 of the verse, for hallad read hallað
       l. 3 fr. bottom, delete has
13,    l. 8, for vettr read noetr
15,    l. 10 fr. bottom, delete and after Night-fare
16.    The 2nd par. of the transl. belongs to the note on p. 14. In the
       3rd par., for needed to journey read were intending to journey
21,    l. 3, delete til before mága
22,    l. 3, read vettrenn
25,    l. 14, delete es before hann
27,    l. 13 for bygðo read bygðu
32,    ll. 7 and 8 fr. bottom, East and under Eyfell are insertions not
       in the Icelandic text
33,    l. 7, read Kirkjo-bólstað
34,    l. 13, read Kirkjo-sand
36,    l. 15 of tr., for out of a feud with read through a false charge
       made by
42,    l. 9, after norðan insert Hvít-aó við sialfa
46,    l. 3, read Baolverk
       l. 11 of tr., for these read the
47,    l. 14, after Ornolfs-dals insert ár and for -laokjar read
       -loekjar
49,    l. 21, read Hárfagre
51,    l. 6, after Gliúfr-ár add ok Guf-ár
       l. 12, insert í before Crums-hólom
52,    l. 4 of tr., read Big-ness
53,    l. 4 of tr., place the comma after southward
54,    last line of tr., for open read iron
56,    l. 9 of tr., read they were both disabled in the battle, but
       Thorrid ... healed them, &c.
58,    par. 3 of tr., read Lon Einar said that Hildigund's witchcraft
       had caused this
       l. 3 fr. bottom, for eight read six
59,    l. 5 fr. bottom, read is howed
63,    l. 2 of tr., read Arn-kell the gode was called on to summon
       l. 4, read some stallions ... were
65,    l. 13, read þaðan
       l. 18, read vaollenn
       par. 4 of tr., read stud-horses
       last line, for Ari read An
69,    l. 6 fr. bottom, for Aulaf read Anlaf
73,    l. 4 of tr., the first winter belongs to the preceding paragraph
74,    par. 2 of tr., for won the victory read got the worst of it
79,    l. 5, after toko til add trúðo þeir því at þeir dæe í hólana
       l. 7 of tr., read when sacrifices began
84,    l. 6, after sonar insert Ingialdr ok Grane voro syner Óleifs
       Feilans
85,    l. 4 fr. bottom, for Mar read Men
86,    l. 8 of notes, for huns read hans
       l. 10 of notes, for vidu read viðu
88,    l. 6, read Foedde
93,    l. 5 of tr. The text reads who made over an action for
       sheep-stealing against Thorarin Giallande to Ogmund
94,    l. 15 of tr., read that Icelanders said so, who had heard it
       told by Thorfin
95,    par. 3 of tr., read for almost every
96,    par. 2 of tr., insert at end their son was Sturla o' Hvamm
97,    l. 21, for þetr read þeir
101,   par. 4 of tr., for Wick read the Wicks
110,   par. 2 of tr., for Bræce's son read Bræcer
114,   l. 4, delete the comma after halft
119,   l. 18, read Hermundar
       par. 2 of tr. The main text reads He came to Iceland because of
       the tyranny of king Harold, and took....
120,   l. 10, for skyldr read skyldo
126,   l. 3 fr. bottom, after to Iceland insert in a magical journey
127,   l. 2 of tr., read it was where they were to settle
128,   par. 5 of tr., read a she-bear and two white cubs
130,   l. 8 of tr., read the Necks
       l. 9 of tr., omit that he could say
       l. 17 of tr., for fell down off read knocked down
135,   l. 5, for sétt read sítt
137,   par. 2 of tr., read porch-pillars, saying that he thought it
       folly to decide matters in that way, but said he would rather,
       &c.
       par. 3 of tr., for it would turn out ill read it had (always)
       turned out ill
139,   l. 3 fr. bottom, for wager read money
142,   par. 2 of tr., delete in Norway
145,   l. 20, for suman read sunnan
148,   l. 4 of tr., insert king before Cearval
153,   l. 20, read ófresker
155,   l. 9, for er read or
157,   l. 1 of tr., insert Then they rowed to the island
       l. 2 fr. bottom, his house, i.e. Hallstan's
165,   l. 1 of tr., for mule read mull
167,   par. 2 of tr., read Cranheath, Thorgerd's fell, and the lower
       part of L.
171,   l. 13, for eige read eiga
       l. 19, read Colla-vík
181,   l. 18, for hafa read hafi
183,   l. 13, read Sandvíkingar
185,   last line, for mouth read month
191,   par. 3 of tr., for priest read priestess
195,   l. 5, read land-voetter
196,   l. 7, read Leiðolfs-felle
201,   l. 8, read Hilde-tannar
205,   ll. 1 and 16, read Hoengs
210,   l. 20, read ófreskr
212,   l. 2, read Þríhyrninge
214,   l. 21, read lengst
       l. 22, for síft read sítt
215,   par. 3 of tr., read Rang-river-fields
216,   par. 2 of tr., read took the outer land
222,   last line, read against Erne
223,   l. 2 of tr., read Thorgrim's property
225,   l. 4 fr. bottom, add Therefore he was called Bairn-carle
228,   par. 3 of tr., delete the river before Axewater
241,   l. 1, read á Mið-boenum
247,   l. 38, (?) read Oláfssonar
256,   ll. 5-6 fr. bottom, read immediately that they drifted ... ship,
       they swept ..., and seemed
260,   l. 4 of tr., read with his children
268,   l. 2 fr. bottom, read son, of Madderfields
269,   l. 6 of tr., read Water-frith
274,   l. 1, read Bókvíse
       l. 22 fr. bottom, read But Laf was borne on men's hands, i.e.
       was nursed carefully
276,   l. 3, after tvá sono insert ok vóro svarter ok furðo lióter
       l. 11, read fóro á veiðe-skóg
       l. 8 of tr., for on a barge read on a war-levy
       l. 10, for quick to talk read clever of speech
286,   1. 3, for whither read where
287,   l. 4 of tr., read one on the same subject
291,   par. 4 of tr., ad fin., read that there was one day more than
       the number of complete weeks....
293,   par. 2 of tr., read or get redress for any injury ... and he
       said that various troubles would arise unless
       par. 3 of tr., read nor to Shaw-frith they that were west of it
294,   last line, insert a Saxon by race
296,   l. 2 fr. bottom, read it is said
297,   l. 5 of tr., insert with half a mark of silver
300,   l. 11 of tr., for then read there
       par. 7 of tr., read from the South, from Frankland
       par. 8 of tr., read four-and-twenty
303,   l. 1 of tr., for untold read not reckoned
304,   l. 11, for miðr read meirr
305,   l. 7 fr. bottom, for And read Aud
309,   par. 3 of tr., for sprinkled read smeared
       par. 4, for across read around
310,   par. 3 of tr., for porch-pillars read high-seat pillars
313,   l. 22, read NN for the second MM
314,   l. 9 fr. bottom, read Now Earth upholds ... and Heaven bounds
       (or defends) it
315,   l. 9 fr. bottom, for many read reconciled with money
319,   par. 3 of tr., read under three earth-necklaces or strips
321,   par. 4 of tr., read they are not bound to fight
323,   l. 1, for eíðan read síðan
325,   l. 2 of tr., read more than three
326,   l. 5, read arens-horne
340,   par. 4 of tr., read for that as for all
341,   l. 1 of tr., add if they will
342,   l. 19, read Álengr
343,   ll. 4 ff., read what each one of them holds to be the law ...
       what he holds to be the law, and with whom ... way; but if there
       be an equal number of law-court men on either side each party
       with their own view of the law, then, &c.
344,   l. 9 fr. bottom, read beg the godes
       l. 4 fr. bottom, read get him men belonging to another
346,   § 38, read falls short in any of his duties without necessity,
       and ... suit shall have half the fine, and
349,   l. 9 fr. bottom, read named or settled
353,   l. 19, for at read ef
       l. 10 of tr., read 9 p.m.
356,   l. 2 fr. bottom, read or at his place, or so that his
357,   ll. 2 and 6 of tr., read 'By this witness,' he shall say
       l. 11 fr. bottom, read at the place of him whom
359,   l. 11 fr. bottom, read lots at the court ... in that court
360,   l. 1 of tr., read that another put a man's lot, &c.
       par. 2 of tr. should run thus: If the man who has obtained by
       lot the first place is not ready, then the man who has got a
       later place shall ask permission to plead his case first; and he
       shall allow him. And if he do not allow him, then he must plead
       his own case [even] if he be not ready
366,   l. 1, read Haoskolldr lézk
       l. 4 of tr., for was read wears
       l. 5 fr. bottom, add and talk over the matter
370,   l. 5 fr. bottom, read to which
379,   l. 2 of tr., read who were present at the incident
380,   l. 11 of tr., for beech read birch
       l. 18 of tr., delete a thatching of
384,   l. 20, after hónom insert ok frændr hans verst
385,   last line, insert and rated him, before and told him
386,   last line, read 'Mighty must he be
388,   l. 9 fr. bottom, read the East-friths
389,   l. 2 fr. bottom, read Beck-bend
390,   l. 11 fr. bottom, read South of C.
391,   l. 10 of tr., for knife-edge read knife-point
392,   l. 10 fr. bottom, read in that court was Sholto, &c.
396,   l. 1 of tr., read Some he threatened with death, and some with
       mutilation
       l. 12 of tr., read rather foolishly
       l. 3 fr. bottom, read worthy that Sholto should intercede for
       him
400,   l. 3, delete til
401,   l. 18, for es read ef
       l. 9 of tr., after Thorlaf insert on a charge of being a
       Christian
403,   l. 6 fr. bottom, read by the eastern route
406,   l. 3 of tr., delete in the West
407,   l. 11, read in the original
408,   l. 8, read weighed out of it
       l. 18 fr. bottom, after put to it insert And if any captives
       fell to his lot, he sent them home to their parents or
       relations, as also those whom he had ransomed with money
410,   l. 26 fr. bottom, for good faith read courage
       l. 16 fr. bottom, read Withe-dale
411,   §. 6, ad fin., read observe or hold as a Christian
       l. 7 fr. bottom, read from the noise of the common
       l. 2 fr. bottom, read who hated him
414,   l. 17, for saith read say
415,   l. 13, read themselves by refusing to them the means of life
       l. 16 fr. bottom, read and if mercy and righteousness
416,   l. 1, read agreed that it liked them well, all that he had
       spoken
       ll. 12-13, read all men were merry and very joyful that they had
       hearkened ... given them, and they received, &c.
417,   l. 26, read all our live stock
420,   l. 11, read who ... who
425,   l. 4 of tr., read a little
426,   l. 9 of tr., for cautiously read humbly
       l. 5 fr. bottom, read poorly here, and if they know anything
       truer (sc. to put in its place)
427,   l. 13, for sví read sú
432,   l. 5 of tr., read things which have been of great note, churches
       ... and small bells
440,   l. 12, for kverjom read hverjom
441,   l. 3, read skaoroligr
       l. 9 fr. bottom, read consecrated to
442,   l. 11 fr. bottom, delete were after they
442,   l. 5 fr. bottom, read was as loving to him as if he had been his
       own son
444,   l. 13, read 13. Mart es merkilegt
       l. 15, delete 13.
445,   l. 8 fr. bottom, read of ready speech
446,   l. 12, read margar
448,   l. 4 of tr., read that scarce can a parallel be found to it in
       Iceland
449,   l. 9 of tr., read seven other priests perished there
       l. 6 fr. bottom, read St. Gereon's day
450,   l. 8 fr. bottom, delete the second at
451,   last line, read so that where he was, a decision might always be
       looked for ... there was need of
452,   ll. 10 and 16, read af-vinno
453,   l. 12 of tr., read in other neighbouring lands. And
       l. 4 fr. bottom, read the day of Vitus the martyr
454,   l. 16, read ber-foettr
455,   l. 10 of tr., read leave that he might be permitted to give over
456,   l. 9 fr. bottom, read in the Lenten Ember days. There
460,   l. 6 of tr., for easy read watchful
462,   l. 4 fr. bottom, read clad about anew with
463,   l. 11, for sem áðr read sem nú
464,   l. 11 fr. bottom, read men that in their way of life come near
       to that whereby ... arose and afterwards waxed great
465,   l. 1 of tr., read has ... has
469,   l. 7 of tr., read went forth for good
       l. 14 of tr., delete before
       l. 17 of tr., read where he was happiest
471,   l. 19, for baoðe read bæðe
472,   l. 11 of tr., read lead to a sense of responsibility
473,   l. 10 of tr., for three more read three men
       l. 11 of tr., for therefore read there for
       l. 14 of tr., read That bore fair ... them, that
474,   l. 9 fr. bottom, read picked out, in order that other
475,   l. 6 of tr., read need of some great supply. After
       l. 17 of tr., read both for the maintenance of them
476,   l. 3 fr. bottom, read in great straits
478,   l. 10 fr. bottom, read blessed bishop
479,   l. 10 fr. bottom, read of the canonical life
480,   l. 3 of tr., read with moderate rebukes
483,   l. 9 of tr., read be writing holy books
484,   l. 5, for er read or
485,   l. 5 of tr., read them in their wholesome counsels
       l. 8, read from wrong desires
486,   ll. 10-11, transpose þó tor-sótt vere to after van-stille, and
       so in translation
487,   l. 4 fr. bottom, for abused read violated
488,   l. 8 of tr., read to those of their doings that were right and
       good
489,   l. 6 of tr., read that had taught them
       l. 2 fr. bottom, read put up with every thing that could be put
       up with and was not disgracefully unbecoming
495,   l. 7 of tr., read free of my sentence
       l. 10 of tr., read would not mend their ways for me
496,   l. 7 fr. bottom, read few that could
498,   l. 5 of tr., read he tried to turn
501,   l. 4 of tr., read minor orders
511,   l. 8 fr. bottom, read and two to ring together in the upper part
       of the church (i.e. two sacring bells in the choir)
512,   l. 8 fr. bottom, read that he was not very anxious to promote
       the canonization of ... Thorlac. But ... wished to requite God
       for the glory that he had let come about ... happened before
513,   l. 6 of tr., read Thor-wald
       l. 11 fr. bottom, read Cetil his son
       l. 4 fr. bottom, read a fast of a day and a night (i.e. it was
       to be one of the greater festivals which have a vigil before
       them)
514,   last line, delete made ready
515,   l. 8 fr. bottom, read the East-friths
516,   l. 5 of tr., read well, that very summer. But
517,   l. 4 of tr., read the East-friths
518,   par. 3 of tr., read told above, though little in comparison with
       the material that there is
519,   l. 8 of tr., read weight of meal
520,   l. 5 of tr., read on thee, Halla
521,   l. 6 of tr., for they foundered read a squall caught them
       l. 12 of tr., read that had the courage to help them
522,   l. 3 of tr., read to cheer others up
       l. 5 of tr., read the person
       l. 11 of tr., read the Invention
523,   l. 6 fr. bottom, read doings as it is good for all to imitate
524,   l. 5 fr. bottom, read else, the like of which had never been
       before
525,   l. 8 fr. bottom, read penance, as a warning to those who were
       involved in the matter, or had made themselves liable to his ban
526,   l. 14 of tr., for ..., read compensations.
       l. 21 of tr., after kinsmen insert who survived
527,   l. 10 fr. bottom, read in other lands
528,   l. 21, for en þau read ef þau
       l. 9 fr. bottom, read Thore the priest
       l. 4 fr. bottom, read carved tusk-ivory for it excellently well
529,   l. 3 fr. bottom, read all Saints and for help
530,   l. 9, for í átte read iátte
       l. 21, read róðra
532,   l. 24, for creinom read hreinom
533,   l. 21, for fa- read fá-
536,   last line, read who considered what manner of countenance he had
538,   l. 4 fr. bottom, that was adorned with many virtues
540,   l. 4, read Ioane
       l. 11, for ok read ek
       l. 1 of tr., read by his own good behaviour
555,   l. 16 of tr., for hourly read so zealously
556,   l. 4 of tr., read whom he had smitten
       l. 4 fr. bottom, read that the one did not conform to the other
557,   l. 7 fr. bottom, read Thor-kel
558,   l. 5 of tr., for Monday read Thursday
565,   l. 2, read mæla.
       l. 19, read byscops
       l. 4 fr. bottom, read 54
566,   l. 7, read bararnar
571,   l. 12 of tr., read by the bishops
573,   l. 6 fr. bottom, for one mind read his counsel
577,   l. 8 of tr., read his father
579,   l. 1, for ór read er
580,   l. 1 of tr., read give her in marriage
584,   l. 8 of tr., read riding up (lit. from below)
585,   l. 4 fr. bottom, read to strike with it
587,   l. 3, for frá read til
588,   l. 1, read ætte
       l. 8, read sekezt
594,   l. 7 fr. bottom, read p. 149.
595,   l. 16 fr. bottom, read we will do thus
596,   ll. 15-16, read go after them
597,   ll. 13, 15, read hoegyndet
       l. 18, read fátoecom
598,   l. 16, read by law, without a battle
599,   par. 2, l. 4, read their own booths and awnings
       par. 3, 1. 6, read holiday for that
600,   l. 15, read therefore; and I refused the boot. And then I
       bethought me ... happened to me; and I saw
       l. 29, read chatter
606,   l. 10, read to the East Friths
       last line, read men's
608,   l. 15, read could not conceive it, and this high house must
       betoken
637,   par. 6, read Einar's answer was that Thord his father's father
       [grand-father] let build
639,   par. 5, for Iungerd read Irongerd
       l. 12, for átit read átti
640,   ll. 15, 17, for IV read V










PART I

BOOK I.

SETTLEMENT AND SETTLERS.


This Book gives the history of the Settlement of Iceland put down by
Are the historian and his contemporaries, the fathers of old Northern
prose history, from oral tradition, and from genealogies treasured
in family remembrance.

Section 1. Are's Landnama-book, the Book of Settlements and
Generations, the foundation of all exact history, political or social,
of the North.

Section 2. Genealogies of the Settlers and their Kin drawn from
other sources than Are's Works, and preserved to us in Nial's Saga
and other Sagas.

Section 3. An early account of the Settlement of the West, now found
heading the Eyrbyggia Saga, but going back to Are.

Section 4. Early notes and memoranda (also going back to Are), known
in modern times as Mantissa; with a tradition relating to one of the
early settlers, now found at the head of Sturlunga Saga.

In this Book therefore lies the fountain-head of Icelandic history. And
more than this, it contains early original authorities for all those
varied phenomena of Scandinavian exodus from Norway, through the
Western Isles to Iceland, of which we have so little other written
record. It also gives much matter concerning early North-British and
Norwegian history.





CHAPTER 1

§ 1. LANDNAMA-BOOK
OR
THE BOOK OF SETTLEMENTS.

Nothing of the work of Are (born 1067, died 1148) has reached us in
his own hand or in a contemporary MS., and his Landnama-book is known
to us in two 13th-century recensions, one in the hand of Lawman Hawk
(born c. 1260, died 1334), compiled from two books, as he tells us;
one of Lawman Styrme (born c. 1170, died 1245); and one of Lawman
Sturla (born 1214, died 1284).

Hawk's autograph MS., AM. 544, has reached us, though in a tattered and
imperfect shape; however, a copy of it, by John Erlendsson, AM. 105,
fol., when in a better condition, exists. Sturla's autograph has
perished, but John Erlendsson made a transcript of a copy of it also,
AM. 107, fol. Both transcripts were made about the middle of the 17th
century. Styrme's-book has perished; we can, however, get exactly at
its contents from Hawk's compilation.

The present text is based on Hawk's-book, marked H and Cd, and
vell. (especially when spelling is in question): the autograph vellum
being used wherever it exists, and elsewhere John's copy. H* refers
to the three leaves lost when John's copy was taken, but, as we have
discovered, existing in part (a part of one leaf at least, pp. 85,
86) when the Mela-book abridgment, below mentioned, was taken, and
preserved in brief in that MS.

Sturla's-book, the next authority, is marked S, but S* refers to bits
scattered through the Tryggvason's Lives, Grette's Saga, and other
works which are taken from the Sturla text; they mostly present an
inferior text.

A short abridgment, of the later part of the 13th century by the
so-called Mela-menn, of Landnama-book has reached us. Only one vellum
fold in a 15th-century MS., containing part of Landnama, is extant in
a poor state; the rest survives in a confused compilation by priest
Thord of Hitardale (c. 1640), taken principally from Mela-book (which
he cites as 'Landnama') and, secondly, from 'Hawk's-book,' and more
sparingly from Sturla's-book (by him cited as 'another book'), and
from other Sagas preserved in the Mela-book volume. The Mela-book
(the vell. fragment) we mark M; the Thord compilation (his own
autograph) M*.

As to the history of these MSS. Arne has left several memoranda. In
AM. 105, John Erlendsson's copy H, his slips run: 'This is that kind
of Landnama-book which Biorn o' Scardsa in his compilation of the
Landnamas calls Hawk's-book.' And, 'This Landnama-book and Christni
Saga Sir Halldor Torfason of By in Floe lent me in 1704; in 1706 I
bought the book of Thurid Sæmund's daughter, so that it is now mine.'

And in AM. 107, Sturla's-book, his slips tell, 'This is that kind
of Landnama-book that Biorn o' Scardsa in his compilation of the
Landnamas calls Landnama.' And, 'This Landnama Sir Halldor Torfason
of By in Floe lent me in 1704, in 1706 I bought the book of Thurid
Sæmund's daughter, so that it is now mine.'

As to the copies of M, in AM. 106, fol., he writes: 'This Landnama I
got from Sir Thord Johnsson of Stade-stead.' And in AM. 112, which
is a leaf for leaf and page for page copy of AM. 106, only twelve
rotten leaves left (ending in II. 15. 9), there is a scrap of paper
slipped in, on which in a handwriting of 1700 stands the contents
of the decayed parts supplied from 106. Of AM. 112, fol., Arne says,
'I got this in Sowerby in Keelness in 1705.'

The Landnama part of Hawk's-book is first known, since the revival
of letters in Iceland, to have been owned by Are Magnusson of Ogr
and Waterfirth in the north-west peninsula of Iceland.

This Are Magnusson of Ogr came of a gentle family, members of which
have been men of note in Iceland. He died in 1654 at a very high
age. It is told of him that he was 'a head taller than any man at the
Moot.' We might guess that Hawk's-book was a kind of heir-loom in his
family, and it seems certainly to have belonged to his father Magnus
(died 1591) before him. Magnus was a poet and a politician in his
day. His poems--Pontus Rímur and Rollant Rímur--were thought well of
by his fellows. There is a verse which runs--



    Hefir nú lýða hials um rann hallað kvæða bramle
    Miúkar síðan mærðir spann Magnus Jónsson gamle,



and laments the decay of song in the West since Magnus spun his sweet
lines. Magnus, in 1581, enacted a law in his district for the arming
of the Icelandic farmers; every householder to keep weapons of such
and such kind for the defence of the land against pirates, and fires
were to be kindled as signals of the foe's approach, 'the smoke
of the fires rising up and being easily seen from place to place,'
the wording of the passage referring to these beacons being evidently
borrowed from a passage of the Landnama as it is in Hawk's-book (Book
V. 1. 2). How it came to Magnus, a North-country man by descent,
we know not; but one might guess, as Mr. Sigurdsson has done, that
it was through his wife, the heiress Ragnheid, Eggert's daughter,
a West-country woman. But whether it passed from Hawk's family
into hers we know not, for of actual record of the book from 1334,
when Hawk died, to 1591, when Magnus died, there is none. The last
remains of Icelandic medieval culture and its family libraries and
gentle life are to be sought for in Magnus' days round the knot of
old Western farms, Ogr, Wigr, Water-frith, By o' Red-sand, Flatey,
Reykhólar, Scard, Stadarhól,--all family estates. Thus Magnus the
Poet lived in Ogr, but died in By o' Red-sand.

The name Hawk's-book (AM. 544) has a double use; sometimes it refers
to the whole vellum, with its heterogeneous contents; and more often
to that part of it which contains the copy of the Landnama-book, and
this name I believe begins with that eccentric and ill-fated scholar
John the Learned, to whom Are Magnusson lent it. Are also lent it to
Arngrim the Learned, who used it for his Specimen Islandiae Historicum,
written in Iceland in 1633, but published at Amsterdam in 1643. About
1640 it passed into Bishop Thorlac's hands, who gave it to Biorn o'
Scardsa for his compilation of Landnama-book, which has been for a
century and a half the textus receptus. Biorn's compilation we put
down to 1640-1643, for Apr. 29, 1645, he speaks of it as a work of
the past. See Prolog. to Sturl. Saga, p. cxliii, foot-note 2.

Of Biorn's work there are many paper copies, AM. 104, 109, 110, 108,
fol., and several others. The first of these by Asgeir Jonsson is,
I believe, made from Biorn's own now lost autograph, year 1643. The
second, 109, is written by John Gizurson (died 1648), and it has the
Marginalia, etc., which Asgeir keeps in their places at the side of the
page, incorporated into the body of the text. There is also a parchment
copy, New. Roy. Lib. 1147, of about 1650. AM. 111 is an abridgment
of no value, chiefly from H. Biorn's method of work is best shown by
a single instance, which at the same time may serve as a useful test,
by which the reader may, without further trouble, detect a copy printed
or written of a Landnama text. In Hawk's-book (I. 3. 9) Ingolf is said
to have come to a desert land, 'at auðo lande;' Sturla's-book reads
'að óbygðu lande,' to an uninhabited land. But Biorn, in framing his
text after the model of the old Gospel Harmonies, carefully puts in
both epithets, and his compound text runs 'at auðu landi óbygðu,'
to a desert land uninhabited; for he did not perceive that in Are's
style the one epithet would exclude the other, and the taste of his
own day for the doubled epithet made it sound well enough to his ear.

Thord Jonsson, the priest of Heat-dale (ordained 1634 and died 1670),
is the other person that used the book for his compilation. His
compilation, we hold, preceded that of Biorn by a few years, for a part
at least of one of the missing leaves (leaf 14) is seen to have been
used by him, whilst in Biorn's text no traces of it are seen; hence we
date it 1635-1640. From Bishop Thorlac it passed into Bishop Bryniolf's
hands; it was he that got John Erlendsson to make the copy AM. 105.

After the Bishop's death the Hawk's-book fell into vandals' hands,
and was pulled to pieces. The Landnama and Christni Saga leaves at
the beginning were severed from the rest, and many of them cut up for
binding. This part of the history of H is thus told by Arne in a slip
in AM. 435: 'These Landnama leaves and those of Christendom's Saga
I got nearly all from Sir Olaf Johnsson [died 1707, father of John
Olafsson, his last secretary], but the father of Sir Olaf, Sir John
Torfason, of Stead in Sugande-firth [N. W. Iceland], got these leaves
from a farmer in the west near him, and took them completely asunder,
one from the other, using them to cover quires or pamphlets. Some
of these Landnama leaves I got from another place than from Sir
Olaf. I saw that these leaves belonged to the beginning of that volume
[Hawk's-book, the remainder of which he had still, as appears below,
in book form], and had undoubtedly in old time been bound up therein,
and therefore I put them in there, in order that the volume should so
far be complete. But the volume itself [AM. 544], with the exception
of those Landnama and Christendom leaves, I got, if I remember right,
from Gaulweriaby in Floe, and it had certainly wandered thither after
Master Bryniolf's death. Master Bryniolf had a copy [John's AM. 105]
written from those Landnama and Christendom Saga, and the book must
then have been complete.'

It may be added that these leaves somehow, after Arne's death, had
been taken again out of Hawk's-book and put under AM. 371, but in 1884
I asked the Librarians to reset them, according to Arne Magnusson's
own direction, in their original place.

The whole of Landnama and Christni Saga is in Hawk's own handwriting.

The following table, founded on close calculation from the extant
leaves, shows the original state of the beginning of Hawk's-book;
three leaves within thick brackets (6, 13, 14) were lost in John
Erlendsson's days, not being in his copy. Of leaf 6 (p. 36, line 10,
to p. 42, line 1) I can find no trace in earlier times, unless it be
in Arngrim's Specimen Island. Hist. (which we mark 'Spec.'), but it
would seem that a strip of leaf 14, the lower half, existed when the
book was in Sir Thord Johnsson's hands.

Since John Erlendsson's time the leaves in ordinary brackets have
been lost. The leaves unbracketed still remain to us.


[1, 2, 3], 4, [5], [6], [7, 8], 9, [10, 11, 12], [13, 14], [15, 16,
17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22], 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, [30, 31], 32, 33,
[34], 35, 36, 37, [38, 39, 40], 41, 42, 43, 44, [45].

The second gap (p. 78, line 20, to p. 85, line 3) must have been of
two leaves, for the amount of text in S is too much for one leaf
of H. Making allowance for the fact that S is here defective and
curtailed, and that, as we gather from M*, the story of the Ceallacings
was fuller in H than in S, the whole text would fit into two leaves.

I have been able to calculate that the Landnama-book began on
the reverse of the first leaf. The junction between Landnama and
Christni Saga began about the middle of leaf 39. Hence of Ld. have
been saved 14, and of Chr. Saga 4,--18 in all out of 45, and these
in a lamentable state, two of the Chr. leaves pared about, nearly
all having been used for binding, stretched over boards. Arne made
untiring efforts to get more of the lost leaves: his correspondence
is given in my preface to Biskopa Sogor (1858), from which it appears
that priest Olaf Johnsson was guilty of the mutilation of the MS.,
though he endeavours to shift the blame upon the poor farmer. Luckily
John Erlendsson's copy is usually very accurate; for though he
often enough skips lines or sentences, he always corrects himself,
underlining the delenda, and then beginning afresh. One curious error
has hereby arisen in Bk. I. 1. 1; he writes, 'fyr norðan Hialtland sva
at siór er í miðjum hlíðum,' then corrects and underlines 'siór er í
m. hlíðum,' but forgets to underline 'sva at.' Hence my bewilderment
in Icelandic Reader, p. 338, ll. 17-20; nothing but autopsy can help
in such cases. I have, however, found one place where he has skipped
a line (III. 18. 2).

The earlier compilations in Biorn's time are too arbitrary and
inaccurate to be of use. In admitting them as helps one simply brings
a world of confusion into what is already a sufficiently delicate task.

The history of Sturla's-book is almost a blank, not a scrap of the
vellum remaining. Hawk, in his Colophon (p. 234), speaks of a book
made by Sturla the Lawman. We can identify John Erlendsson's copy as
drawn from a vellum of this Sturla-book by its pedigrees being drawn to
'Sturla í Hvammi' and other worthies of the Sturlung family, notably to
'the mother of the Sturlungs.' The very use of 'í Hvammi' rather than
'Hvamm-Sturla,' as Hawk puts it, is characteristic and contemporary,
and would fix the autotype to some one of the Sturlung family.

But the existence of this type of Landnama-book during the 14th century
is still further proved by the fact that there are many Sagas in which
pieces out of Landnama-book were inserted by their latest editors or
compilers, (Olaf Tryggvason, Grette Saga,) and in all cases these
citations follow the Sturla text distinctly, and are to be used as
if taken from some sister or daughter MS. Judging by its frequent
use--for even the author of Bardar Saga, a fictitious Saga of the
14th century, largely draws from it--we suspect that there was more
than one MS. of the Sturla type. However, only one copy survived into
the 17th century, viz. the copy that Biorn o' Scardsa knew and called
'Landnama,' Thord o' Hitardale 'Önnur-bók,' and which Bishop Bryniolf
luckily made John Erlendsson copy. After this transcript was taken of
it, when it must have been well-nigh perfect, it vanishes without a
sign. I have fancied that it may have been sent abroad as a present
by the bishop to the king or some other noble collector, and been
lost at sea or by accident on the way. As to its age we have only
John Erlendsson's copy, which is oftentimes normalized into his own
spelling, to help us; there are, however, a few distinctive phonisms
which pierce through John's normalization, such as 'lb' for 'lf,'
and from considering and weighing all I incline to think it was a
good 14th-century copy of an older MS. of the Sturlunga time, and
was not itself of the Sturlunga time.

Mela-book must claim a few lines to itself on account of the
confusion which has hitherto prevailed with respect to it. It was a
closely-written vellum, containing other Sagas besides Landnama-book,
besides genealogical matter, etc. The ply or fold, which survives of
the Landnama part of it, was, we think, the second of a quarternion
or gathering of four folds. The first page of its first leaf is black
and dirty, having been stretched over boards for binding; however, its
contents were most of them read by Mr. Sigurdsson and found to consist
of pedigrees (printed, as far as they can be read in continuity,
in Sturlunga, 1878, vol. ii. 497-98). These pedigrees continue on
the next page, but cease at the 16th line of its first column, and
allow Landnama to begin on the 17th line, and fill of course the rest
of that and the next columns (Reader, pp. 17-19). The next two plies,
four leaves, are wholly lost; but then comes the other leaf of our ply,
and on it, as we should have supposed, Landnama-book is still going
on, covering both pages (II. ch. 7. 2 to ch. 22. 2). The knowledge
of the contents of the missing leaves enables us to calculate how
large a space Landnama-book must have filled, and how many leaves of
it are lost.

From Thord's Compilation (for, as might be expected, he sometimes
omits to note down 'Landnama-book,' now and then even puts it in a
wrong place), inasmuch as we know the contents of Hawk's-book and
Sturla-book, we can, by simple subtraction, get a residue drawn from
the now perished parts of Mela-book. But Thord did not limit himself
to taking extracts from the Landnama part of Mela-book, but also
extracted bits of the Vatzdæla, Eyrbyggia, Floamanna Sagas and Glúma,
which were also in the vellum before him (see Fornsogur, Leipzig,
1860, pp. 189-195, and the foot-notes to pp. 195-204). Yet it is not
right to use these extracts of his as if they had ever formed part
of Landnama-book: their place is in the apparatus criticus of the
respective Sagas to which they belong, and much confusion has resulted
in editions from this not being known. Of course it was not till the
full contents of the original Mela-book vellum were (in 1840) found out
by Mr. Sigurdsson that this necessary distinction could be observed.

We distinguish therefore between 'Mela-book,' meaning the Landnama
part, and the 'Mela-book vellum,' meaning the whole MS., precisely
as we did with regard to Hawk's-book.

The Mela-book vellum was written, as we judge from the handwriting,
about 1430; but it must be, as far as Landnama goes, a copy of a MS. of
the end of the 13th century; for Thord, citing a passage in which the
List of Law-speakers is given, says, after naming a man whose office
ends in 1272, 'here ends the list of Law-speakers in my Landnama-book,'
so that the scribe of 1430 is copying a MS. 150 years old in his
day. We can even tell by a curious leap (from Bk. II. ch. 11. 6 to
ch. 15. 3) which the scribe makes from the middle of one pedigree
to the middle of another, three chapters ahead without any ado, that
there was a leaf missing in this archetype, and that he did not even
notice the omission, which indeed was hardly to be detected at first,
being in the midst not of a story, but of a genealogy. One might even,
from the amount of matter omitted, roughly calculate the size of the
lost autotype's page.

In the Mela-book vellum about nine leaves or eighteen pages were, we
calculate, filled with Landnama matter (not one-third of the full text
as in H). It is difficult to tell how far the autotype was abridged,
or under what conditions it was produced. This is a problem beyond
us at present. The Landnama part of Mela-book as also the List of
Law-speakers was, when Sir Thord's compilation was made, complete,
and the rest of the Sagas that were in the same vellum in the main
complete also. The whole, when complete, might be calculated at about
sixty leaves. By Arne's day only twelve were left, of which two only,
as we have seen, touch Landnama matter; which twelve leaves I, in 1884
(completing my former work of 1860), gathered duly into AM. 445 b,
entitling the whole the 'Mela-book vellum.'

A peculiarity of S is the frequent occurrence of blanks, but in three
out of four instances it turns on the name of a man's wife, in the
recurring phrase, N. N. married ... their son (sons), etc. These
blanks H and M do not fill up, and the Editor believes that Are's
text never included those names, but that the writer of S wished to
aim at uniformity, hoping perhaps to light upon the names which the
MSS. before him did not supply. Are seems to have passed on in such
cases without remark.

Hawk only mentions having used the books of Sturla and Styrme. Having
Sturla's-book, we can subtract it from the rest of Hawk's-book,
and presume what is left to be Styrme's. (A few glosses, such
as I. 1. 1, may be Hawk's own, but besides the pedigrees that is
all.) And this enormously simplifies the problem, which, without the
help of Sturla's-book, would have been indeed a difficult one. We get
some notion of what Styrme's-book must have been, and note that only
three authorities are cited--Are's-book, and the Borgfirdinga-kynslóð
by Brand the Chronicler or Frode (II. 13. 1), and the information
supplied by Colsceg the Wise (IV. 9 sqq.), as to a particular part
of the country. How far Styrme himself was compiling, and how far
working from another compilation, we cannot at present tell. As to
Hawk's fidelity, we must not be too exacting in fixing the highest
standard; he copies names and facts accurately enough as a whole,
and where he makes mistakes, they are excusable from the difficulty
and toil of the task. But we can detect one important omission at
least, and from that judge that there were, most probably, others
of more or less import, and it is necessary to note this if we want
to have a complete idea of the way MSS. were copied by intelligent
scribes in the Middle Ages. The Story of Leot (Bk. II. ch. 24) would
have been before Hawk's eyes in Sturla's-book,--as also II. 6. 4,
and 7. 6,--and by his own rule he ought to have taken it from there,
even if it were not found in Styrme's-book; but he has omitted it
altogether. It strikes one that Bk. II. chs. 18-24 incl. (and the
story of Leot falls within this section) is in S thickly strewn
with minute genealogical matter not found in H. Three reasons
for this suggest themselves. Was Hawk less accurate here? Or, was
his copy of S defective here? Or, was our copy of S that survived,
glossed here by some local western genealogist? We should prefer the
last alternative. Elsewhere S adds whole sections only sparingly,
e.g. III. 5. 5, IV. 16. 5, 19. 4. It is lucky that, on the whole,
Hawk follows Styrme's-book, because it was certainly the better text,
and we must not too literally accept his broad statement that, for
the most part, they contained the same text. The place of honour he
gives to Sturla is probably on account of his rank and family.

The real problem of the exact provenance of each part of the
Landnama-book, as it now stands, lies behind Hawk, Sturla, and Styrme;
they were editors, not authors. There are many parts of the book
which are clearly not Are's work, nor ranging with Are's plan, but
they are old, they are bits of real tradition, and we cannot cut them
out haphazard, nor can we give their origin, nor say how they came
to take their place in the original framework as devised by Are. It
is with these questions that criticism must deal: in this place we
must content ourselves with stating the existing facts.

Landnama-book was by no means unfrequently quoted by the compilers of
the writing ages of Iceland. In the 14th century the Great Olaf's Saga,
extant in several MSS. (Flatey-book, AM. 61, Berg-book, etc.), contains
whole pages from it touching the discoverers, the Christian Settlers,
Eiric the Red, and other matters which interested the compiler or
seemed germane to the book he was copying. Again, Grette's Saga has
several pickings from Landnama-book used by its 14th-century editors
to eke out the Saga or give it an air of history. The still more
fabulous and fictitious Sagas of the 14th century, the Sagas of Bard,
Viglund, Thorstan Oxfoot, are all largely helped out by Landnama-book,
and we are even able from Bard's Saga to supply a missing name in our S
(III. 2. 3). All these citations, save those of Thorstan Oxfoot's Saga,
were taken from a sister MS. of S. It has been declared with regard
to classic Greek and Latin books that quotations almost invariably
present poorer text than the texts themselves. But this observation
would apply tenfold here. All these quotations would cover well-nigh
the seventh part of the whole Landnama, yet taken all in all they
give scarcely a line without impairing or curtailing the text.

But in the 13th-century citations the cases stand a little
differently. Floamanna Saga actually, for the only time in the classic
literature, cites Landnama-book by name. Its first twelve chapters
and ch. 18 are just Landnama-book dramatized. But the text used here
is an old one lying at the back of H and S, and from it we gather
one important link in a pedigree (p. 19, note 5).

In Egil's Saga, again, chapters of Landnama-book are freely
paraphrased, though not cited by name. Two passages (II. 4. 9, 10)
give us fragments of a text now lost in H or S, possibly earlier
than Styrme's-book. The Landnama sections of Eyrbyggia are given
in § 3; those of Laxdola and Vatzdola Sagas will be given in the
Fourth Book, §§ 2 and 3, and need not be dwelt on here. Havard's
Saga, curiously enough, yields latest evidence as to the existence
of this pre-Hawk text. In the 16th century this Saga seems to have
existed in one MS. 'mutilum in calce,' and a fictitious ending was
therefore manufactured by the help of Landnama. He must have used
a better text than ours, for this late paraphrast has helped us to
mend a passage (Bk. II. 24. 2) in S (for the chapter is missing in
H): the word 'gersomi' is a proof positive of the authority of the
paraphrast's text.

The sad loss of three leaves in Hawk's-book may be estimated when
we remember that in the portion of S, corresponding to two of those
leaves, there are three grave errors--the bit about Thord Gelle
(II. 14. 8), the omission of Are's own ancestors (II. 15. 14), and
the corrupt paragraph about the Ceallacings (II. 16). S* yields no
help in these places.

The object of the present edition is to give the text of Are's day
as purely as may be, whereof all obvious insertions, such as the
continuations of pedigrees (to Hawk in Hawk's-book, and to the Melamen
in Mela-book, and to the Sturlungs in Sturla-book), are eliminated and
given at the end of this volume. What pieces of later work (glosses,
legends of genealogies, references of later date) are left in the text,
are marked off by thick brackets.

The foot-notes are confined to the most substantial and necessary
matters of text.

Sturla's-book being itself an abridgment, his chief omissions and
inversions will be given together in an appendage.

There are a few cases where we give a double text, printing the two
versions together, as it is important that no variations of any note
should be relegated in foot-notes or appendices.

As instances of these, to show the state of the text, we would notice
a passage where S gives a varying text (pp. 16, 17) reversing the
order of the discoverers of Iceland. More interesting, however, are the
varying passages in M, such as those relating to Blund-Cetil (II. 2. 5)
and to the Iron-Smith (II. 3. 11), to Ord o' Tongue (I. 10. 4); but
of greater moment still the section touching Scalla-Grim (II. 4. 1),
where there can be no doubt, as we shall elsewhere show, that M is
right, and solves the historic difficulty which the enormous extent
of Scalla-Grim's claim, as given in S, created. It is impossible
here to restore the true text in I. 8. 1, so we leave it just as it
stands in S; and in II. 4. 1, we give the text according to M. We lack
Styrme's-book here, and in Hawk's-book just here one leaf is missing,
though we presume that in this instance he followed Sturla's text,
it being the longest. M gives fresh sections, absent both in H and S,
II. 7. 1, 21. 2, III. 17. 3; and single clauses, III. 1. 2, IV. 14. 3,
line 7, 18. 7, V. 4. 6, 11. 2, line 17.

The verses which are preserved in Landnama-book fall into two
categories, one comprising verses given in their old rough state,
the other covering verses touched up and remodelled in accordance
with 13th-century taste. In the first case they are printed and
translated in full; in the second, the reader is referred to the Corpus
Poeticum Boreale, and the translation only gives as much of them as
is manifestly old. Each particular case will be briefly discussed in
appended notes.

Our 13th-century MSS. of Landnama-book, like other Icelandic vellums,
did not follow their archetype in spelling, and are therefore not to
be finally followed in this respect. In the present text the spelling
is in accordance with the oldest vellums, and comes as near Are's
as is needful or practicable, the chief discrepancies between our
spelling and Are's being that we use both þ and ð, and make freer
use of k than he would have done, for the convenience of students
who may the easier use the Oxford Lexicon.

The spelling which is used in the first three Books of this work,
relating to the Settlement, Constitution, and Conversion of Iceland,
marks off to the eye and ear the early pragmatic history of Are's days
and Are's school from the late Epic history of the Family Histories.

Are divided his work into books, and (as we learn from the last
chapter, V. 17. 1, 2) marked off these books into sections, giving
one to each of the greater settlers whose families and adventures are
therein. This arrangement of his we have considered ourselves bound
to, and have therefore neglected recent notation; we have further
helped the reader by breaking up the chapters into small paragraphs,
after the manner of other classics.

Older editions of this book are the interesting black-letter editio
princeps of Scalholt, 1688; the Copenhagen edition, with Latin version,
of 1774,--both founded on the rough 17th-century compilation of
Biorn o' Scardsa; the Copenhagen Rafn's edition of 1830,--founded
on Hawk's-book. John Sigurdsson's edition of 1843 gives for the
first time Sturla's text in its large print, putting H or M in small
print in foot-notes, or in italics into the text. The MS. notation
of these older editions marks H as C, S as B, and M vellum as E c,
while Thord's compilation is cited as E.

The translation is literal, the same technical terms being always
Englished in the same way, and the word of the original being preserved
where, as in the case of gode or herse, its exact connotation cannot
be given in our English word. In the text brackets show interpolation,
and if thick, double text; but in the translation, if without note
of MS., the plain brackets contain explanatory matter; Italics,
supplied matter, as in A. V. of the Bible. The names are normalized
in the translation into O. E. shape pretty consistently. Where the
original Irish equivalents are given in brackets the O. N. form is
preserved in the translation. The text being above the translation
will in every case prevent any confusion in these heads.

We have extended the peculiar genealogical contractions used in
Landnama MSS. in every case, and this was necessary as several
mistakes have occurred through the misinterpretation or copying of
these contractions. The later genealogies, printed in Appendix,
show the way in which these pedigrees are given in 13th-century
Icelandic MSS. and their copies, where the letters .f. = father in
all cases of the word, .s. = son in all cases singular, .ss. = sons
in all cases plural, m or m = mother in all cases singular, .d. =
daughter in all cases singular. This must be remembered in cases of
textual criticism. There is e.g. a case I have met with where m and
'oc' have been confounded. The emendation, Bk. II. 14. 8, is based
on this. There must probably still be cases in our texts where such
mistakes have caused errors we have not been able to detect, though
we have found out more than one instance.

Other contractions, such as those for the proper names, Þ for Thor,
and the like, geographical, f. for firth, and the lð which stands for
'land' or 'laond,' singular or plural; this latter we have extended
according to the sense and context, thus 'hann nam land' the standing
phrase, but 'laond' where the plural 'lands' is inferred.

All proper names are given as in Are's own day, but no further back,
not as the persons who owned them would necessarily have spoken
them. Thus Are said Thord, and so we give it, but Thord Gelle would
no doubt have called himself 'Thorrod.' So in the case of Oleif. See
Lexic. 471.b. In Gaelic or otherwise foreign-looking name we use c,
not only in Ceartan, Ceallac, but also in Cetil, where it presumably
represents a disguised Icelandised = Gael. Cathal.


------
FIGURE
------
The arrangement of Are's great work, which is at once simple,
consistent, and scientific, needs a word or two here. A glance at
the map will show that only the rim of Iceland is inhabited, and
that a circuit of the coast will practically include all settled
spots. Are took advantage of this fact for his plan. In five books
he makes the circuit of the island sun-wise, taking settlement after
settlement in due geographical order. He starts, after a prologue and
an introductory section on the first discoverers of Iceland, on his
progress at the spot where the first great settlement was made by the
present Reykjavik. In the first book he got as far as the west-end of
the South-land. His second book takes the West-friths, the third the
North-land, the fourth the East-frith, the fifth dealing with the east
part of the South-lands and completing the work. The fifth and first
books together make up the account of the South-lands: the whole work
is like an ancient ring with ends that correspond o-like symbol which
is open at the bottom.. This plan is carried out without divergence,
and where information is supplied by Colsceg or other friends, such
work falls easily into its due place.

It is interesting to note that Mela-book, as we have it, starts with
the beginning of the South-land quarter, not in the midst of the
South-lands as Are had done, all presumably in four books.








Þetta es Prologus fyrer bóc þesse.

Íaldafars-bóc, þeirre es Beda prestr heilagr goerðe, es geteð eylannz
þess es Thile heiter á bócom, es sagt es at ligge vj doegra sigleng
norðr frá Bretlande. Þar sagðe hann eige koma dag á vettr, þá es nótt
es lengst [1]: ok eige nótt á5 sumar, þá es dagr es lengstr. Til þess
ætla vitrer menn þat haft at Ísland sé Thile kallað, at þat es víða á
landeno, at sól skínn um noetr þá es dagr es lengstr: en þat es víða um
daga, at sól sér eige þá es nótt es lengzt.--En Beda prestr andaðesk
dccxxxv aórom efter holdgan várs Herra Jesu Christi, at því es riteð
es,10 meirr an c ára fyrr an [2] Ísland bygðesk af Norðmaonnom. En áðr
Ísland bygðesk af Norðmaonnom vóro þar þeir menn es Norð­menn kalla
Papa; þeir vóro menn Cristner; ok hyggja menn at þeir mone vereð hafa
vestan um haf; þvi at fundosk efter þeim boekr Írskar, ok biollor ok
baglar, ok enn fleire hluter, þeir at [3] þat15 mátte skilja at þeir
vóro Vestmenn. Þat fansk í Papey austr ok í Papyle [4]. Ok es þess
geteð á bócom Enskom, at í þann tíma vas faret miðle landanna.





This is the Prologue to this Book.

In the book of the Course of Ages [De sex hujus saeculi aetatibus,
part of the book De ratione temporum] which priest Beda the holy made,
there is spoken of an Island which is called Thile in books [in Latin],
and it is said that it lies six days' [24 hours'-day] sailing north
of Bretland [Brittannia]. There, he said, there came not any day in
the winter when the night is longest and no night in summer when the
day is longest. The reason why wise men hold that Iceland is Thile,
is because over much of the country the sun shines through the night
when the day is longest or in the longest day, and the sun is not
seen in the longest night. Now priest Beda died 735 years after the
incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ, as it is written, more than 100
years before Iceland was settled by Northmen. But before Iceland was
settled by Northmen there were there those people whom the Northmen
call Papas. They were Christian men, and people think that they must
have been from the West of the Sea [the British Isles] because there
were found after them Irish books and bells and crooks, and yet more
things, by which it might be perceived that they were West-men. These
things were found in East Papey and in Papyli. And it is also spoken
of in English books that at that time men went between the lands
[British group and Iceland].










LIB. I.

[[24: i. 1.]]


Her hefr Landnáma-bóc; ok seger í enom fyrsta Capitula hvert skemst
es frá Íslande.

[Á þeim tíma er Ísland fansk ok bygðisk af Noregi, var Adrianus Papa í
Roma ok Johannes, sa es enn v var með því nafni í því sæti: en Hloðver
Hloðversson keisari fyr norðan5 Fiall: en Leo ok Alexander son hans
yfir Mikla-garði: þá var Haraldr enn Hárfagri konungr yfir Noregi: en
Eirikr Eymundar son yfir Svia-ríki, ok Biorn son hans: en Gormr enn
Gamli at Danmork: Elfraðr enn Ríki í Englandi ok Iátvarðr son hans:
en Ciarvall at Dyflinni: Sigurðr enn Ríki iarl at Orkneyjum.]10


1. 1. Svá segja vitrer menn, at or Norege frá Staðe sé vii doegra
sigleng til Horns á austan-verðo Íslande:

En frá Snæfellz-nese [5] iiii doegra sigleng til Hvarfs á Groena-lande:

[Af Hernom af Norege skal sigla iamnan í vestr til Hvarfs á15
Groena-lande; ok es þá siglt fyr norðan Hiallt-land,--þvi at eins sé
þat at all-góð sé sióvar-sýn--en fyr sunnan Færeyjar, svá at siór es
í miðjom hlíðom; en svá fyr sunnan Ísland, at þeir hafa af fogl ok
hval.] [6]


[[27: i. 1.]]

Frá Reykjanese á sunnan-verðo Íslande es þriggja doegra haf til
Iolldo-laups á Írlande í suðr:

En frá Langa-nese á norðan-verðo Íslande es fiogorra doegra haf til
Svalbarða norðr í Hafs-botn.

En doegr-sigleng es til Úbygða á Groena-lande or Kolbeinsey í5 norðr.


2. 1. Garðarr hét maðr, son Svávars ens Soenska; hann átti iarðer í
Siólande, en vas foeddr í Svia-ríke. Hann fór til Suðreyja at heimta
faoðor-arf kono sínnar. En es hann siglðe í goegnom Pettlandz-fiaorð,
þá sleit hann undan veðr,10 ok rak hann vestr í haf; hann kom at lande
fyrer austan Horn--þar vas þá haofn.--Garðarr siglde umhverfiss landet,
ok visse at þat vas eyland. Hann kom á fiaorð þann es hann kallaðe
Skiál­fanda; þar skuto þeir báte, ok gekk á Náttfare þræll hans; þá
slitnaðe festren, ok kom hann í Náttfara-vík fyr útan Skugga-biaorg;15
en Garðarr kom aoðrom-megen fiarðarens, ok vas þar um vettrenn--því
kallaðe hann þar Húsa-vík.--Náttfare vas efter með þræl sínn ok
ambaótt--því heiter þar Náttfara-vík.--Garðarr siglðe austr aftr,
ok lofaðe miok landet, ok kallaðe Garðars-holm.

2. Naddoðr [7] hét maðr, bróðer OExna-Þóress, mágr Olvéss
Barna­karls;20 hann vas víkingr mikell--af því stað-festesk hann í
Færeyjom, [[26: i. 26.]] at hann átte hverge annars-staðar vel friðt
[8]. Hann fór or Norege, ok vilde til Eyjanna; ok varð sæ-hafe til
Garðars-holms, ok kom í Reyðar-fiaorð í Aust-fiaorðom; ok gengo þeir
þar á en hæsto fiaoll, at vita, ef þeir sæe nockorar manna-vister eða
reyke; ok saó þeir ecke líkenda [9]. En es þeir siglðo frá landeno,
fell sniór mikell.--Af5 því kallaðe hann Snæ-land.--Þeir lofoðo
miok landet.

[S: Svá er sagt at menn skyldo fara or Norege til Færeyja,--nefna
sumer til þess Naddoð víking--en þá rak vestr í haf, ok fundo þar
land mikit. Þeir gengo upp í Austfiaorðom á fiall eitt hátt, ok
sásk um víða, ef þeir sæe reyke, eða noeckor líkende til þess at10
landet være bygt; ok saó þeir þat ecke. Þeir fóro aftr um hausteð til
Færeyja. Ok es þeir siglðo af landeno, fell snær mikill á fiaoll--ok
fyrer því kaolloðo þeir landet Snæ-land. Þeir lofoðo miok landet.

Þar heiter nú Reyðar-fiall á Austfiaorðom es þeir haofðo at komet.

Svá sagðe Sæmundr prestr enn Fróðe.15

Maðr hét Garðarr, Svávars son, Soenskr at ætt. Hann fór at leita
Snæ-lannz at tilvísan móðor sínnar fram-sýnnar. Hann kom at lande fyr
austan Horn et Eystra.--Þar vas þá haofn.--Garðarr [[28: i. 2.]] siglðe
umhverfes landet, ok visse at þat vas eyland. Hann vas um vetr norðr
í Húsavík á Skialfanda ok goerðe þar hús. Um váret, es hann vas buenn
til hafs, sleit frá hónom mann á báte, es hét Náttfare, ok þræl ok
ambátt; hann bygðe þar síðan es heiter Náttfara-vík. Garðarr fór þá
til Noregs ok lofaðe miok landet.5

Hann vas faðer Una, faoðor Hroars Tungo-Goða.

Efter þat vas landet kallat Garðars-holmr, ok vas þá skógr miðle
fiallz ok fiaoro.]

3. Flóke Vilgerðar son hét víkingr mikell: Hann biósk af Roga-lande
at leita Snælannz. [10] Þeir laógo í Smior-sunde. Hann feck at10
blóte miklo, ok blótaðe hrafna þriá, þá es hánom skylldo leið vísa
[þvi at þá höfðo hafsiglingar-menn engir leiðar-stein í þann tíma í
Norðr-laondom]. Þeir hlóðo þar varða es blóteð hafðe veret, ok kaolloðo
Flóka-varða--þat es þar es moetesk Haorða-land ok Roga-land.--Hann fór
fyrst til Hiallt-lannz, ok lá í Flóka-váge. Þá15 týndesk Geirhilldr,
dótter hans, í Geirhilldar-vatne. Með Flóka vas á skipe boande sá
es Þórolfr hét; en annarr Herjolfr; ok Faxe, Suðreyskr maðr. Flóke
siglðe þaðan til Foereyja, ok gifte þar dóttor sína--Frá henne vas
Þróndr í Gaoto.

Þaðan siglðe hann út í haf með hrafna þá þriá es hann hafðe20 blóteð
í Norege. Ok es hann lét lausan enn fyrsta, fló sá aftr um [[29:
i. 2.]] stafn: annarr fló í loft upp, ok aftr til skips: þriðe fló
framm um stafn, í þá átt es þeir fundo landet. Þeir kómo austan at
Horne. Þá siglðo þeir fyr sunnan landet. En es þeir siglðo vestr
um Reykja-nes, ok upp lauk firðenom svá at þeir saó Snæfellz-nes,
þá mælte Faxe--'Þetta mon vesa miket land, es ver haofom fundet;5
her'ro [11] vaotn stór'--þat es síðan kallaðr Faxa-óss. Þeir Flóke
[12] siglðo vestr yfer Breiða-fiaorð, ok tóko þar land sem heiter
Vatz­fiaorðr. Fiaorðrenn allr vas fullr af veiðe-skap, ok gaóðo þeir
eige fyr veiðom at fá til [13] heyjanna, ok dó allt kvik-fé þeirra
um vettrenn. Vár vas helldr kallt. Þá geck Flóke norðr á fiaoll ok
sá fiaorð einn10 fullan af haf-ísom--því kaolloðo þeir landet Ísland.

Þeir fóro braut um sumaret, ok urðo síð-búner. [Þar sér enn skála-toft
þeirra inn frá Brians-loek, ok svá hrófet, ok svá seyðe þeirra.] Þeim
beit eige fyrer Reykjanes, ok þar sleit frá þeim bátenn, ok á Herjolf;
hann kom í Herjolfs-haofn. Flóke kom í15 Hafnar-fiaorð: þeir fundo
hval á eyre einne út frá firðenom, ok kaolloðo þar Hval-eyre. Þar
fundosk þeir Herjolfr.

Um sumaret siglðo þeir til Noregs. Flóke lastaðe miok landet; en
Herjolfr sagðe kost ok laost af landeno; en Þórolfr kvað driúpa smior
af hverjo stráe á lande því, es þeir haofðo fundet.--Því vas20 hann
kallaðr Þórolfr Smior.

[[31: i. 3.]] 3. 1. Biornolfr hét maðr, en annarr Hróalldr:--þeir vóro
syner Hrómunnz Grips sonar--þeir fóro af Þela-maork fyr víga saker,
ok stað-festosk í Dals-firðe á Fiaolom: son Biaornolfs vas Orn, faðer
Ingolfs ok Helgo; en Hroallz son var Hroðmarr, faðer Leifs. Móðer
Leifs vas Hroðný, dótter Ketils5 Bifro, Horða-Kára sonar [14].

2. Þeir Ingolfr ok Leifr, fóstbroeðr, fóro í hernað með sonom
Atla iarls ens Mióva af Gaulom, þeim Hásteine, ok Hersteine ok
Holmsteine. Með þeim fóro aoll skifte vel. Ok es þeir kómo heim,
mælto þeir til sam-fara með ser annat sumar. En um vettren10 goerðo
þeir fóst-broeðr veizlo sonom Atla iarls: at þeirre veizlo strengðe
Holmsteinn heit, at hann skyllde eiga Helgo Arnar dóttor, eðr enga kono
ella. Um þessa heit-strenging fansk maonnom fátt. En Leifr roðnaðe
[15], ok varð fátt um með þeim Holmsteine þá es þeir skilðo þar at
boðeno [16].15

Um váret efter bioggosk þeir fóstbroeðr í hernað, ok ætloðo at fara
til mótz við sono Atla iarls [17]. Þeir fundosk við Hísar-gafl; ok
laogðo þeir Holmsteinn broeðr þegar til orrosto við þá fóst-broeðr. En
er þeir hofðo barzt um hríð, þá kom at [18] Öl­móðr enn Gamle, son
Haorða-Kára, frænde Leifs, ok veitte20 [[32: i. 4.]] þeim Ingolfe. Í
þeirre orrosto fell Holmsteinn; en Hersteinn flýðe. Þá fóro þeir
Leifr í hernað. En um vettren efter fór Hersteinn at þeim Leife,
ok vilde drepa þá. En þeir fengo niósn af faor hans, ok fóro í mót
hónom ok baorðosk; ok fell þar Hersteinn. Efter þat vóro menn sender á
fund Atla iarls ok Hásteins5 at bióða sætter; ok sættosk þeir at því,
at þeir Leifr guldo eigner sínar þeim feðgom.

3. Þeir fóstbroeðr bioggo eitt miket skip [19], ok fóro at leita lannz
þess, er Hrafna-Flóke hafðe fundet; es þá vas Ísland kallað. Þeir
fundo landet; ok vóro í Aust-fiaorðom í Alfta-firðe-enom-syðra.10 Þeim
virðesk landet betr suðr an norðr. Þeir vóro einn vettr á landeno,
ok fóro þá aftr til Noregs.

4. Efter þat varðe Ingolfr fé þeirra til Íslannz-ferðar; en Leifr
fór í vestr-víkeng [20]. Hann herjaðe á Írland, ok fann þar iarð-hús
miket. Þar geck hann í, ok vas myrkt, þar til er lýste af vápne
[21] því15 es maðr hélt á. Leifr drap þann mann, ok tók sverðet, ok
miket fé annat [22].--Síðan vas hann kallaðr Hiaor-Leifr.--Hiaorleifr
herjaðe víða um Írland ok feck þar miket her-fang. Þar tók hann þræla
tio [23], es svá héto: Dufþacr, ok Geirroðr, Scialldbeorn, Halldor,
ok Drafdrit [24].--Eigi ero fleire nefnder. Efter þat fór Hiaorleifr
til Noregs,20 ok fann þar Ingolf fóst-bróðor sínn. Hann hafðe fenget
áðr Helgo Arnar dóttor, systor Ingolfs.

[[33, 34: i. 6.]] 5. Vettr þenna feck Ingolfr at blóte miklo,
ok leitaðe ser heilla um forlaog sín: en Hiaorleifr vilde aldrige
blóta. Frétten vísaðe Ingolfe til Íslannz. Efter þat bió sítt skip
[25] hvárr þeirra mága til Íslannz; hafðe Ingolfr félags-fé þeirra á
skipe; en Hiaorleifr her-fang sítt. Þeir laogðo til hafs þá es þeir
vóro búner, ok siglðo út.5

6. Sumar þat es þeir Ingolfr fóro at byggia Ísland hafðe Haraldr
konongr enn Hárfagre veret xii aór konungr í Norege. Þá vas liðet frá
upphafe þessar veraldar, ok frá því es Adam vas skapaðr, vi þúsunder
vettra ok lxxiij vettr: en frá holdgan Dróttens várs Jesu Christi
dccc ára ok lxxiiij vettr.10

7. Þeir haofðo sam-flot þar til es þeir saó Ísland; þá skilðe með
þeim. En þá es Ingolfr sá land, skaut hann fyr borð aondoges-súlom
sínom til heilla. Hann mælte svá fyrer, at hann skylde þar byggja
es súlornar koeme á land. Ingolfr tók þar land sem nú heiter
Ingolfs-haofðe. En Hiaorleif rak vestr fyr landet. Feck15 hann
vatn-fátt. Þá tóko þrælarner Írsko þat ráð, at knoða saman miol
ok smior, ok kaolloðo þat úþorst-látt--þeir nefndo þat minþac.--En
es þat vas til buet, kom regn miket, ok tóko þeir þá vatn af [26]
tiaoldom. En es minþacet tók at mygla, kaostoðo þeir því fyr borð,
ok rak þat á land þar [27] sem nú heiter Minþacs-eyrr.20

Hiaorleifr tók land við Hiaorleifs-haofða, ok vas þar [28] fiaorðr,
ok [[35: i. 7.]] horfðe botnenn at haofðanom. Hiaorleifr let þar goera
skála tvá--ok es aonnor toften xviij faðma, en aonnor xix.--Hiaorleifr
sat þar um vettrenn.

En um váret vilðe hann sá. Hann átte einn oxa, ok lét hann þrælana
draga arðrenn; en es þeir Hiaorleifr vóro at skála, þá goerðe5 Dufþacr
þat ráð, at þeir skyldo drepa oxann, ok segja, at skógar-biaorn hefðe
drepet; en síðan skyldo þeir ráða á þá Hiaorleif, es [29] þeir leitaðe
biarnarens. Efter þat saogðo þeir Hiaorleife þetta. En es þeir fóro
at leita biarnarens, ok dreifðosk um [30] skógenn, þá draópo þrælarner
sér hvern þeirra; ok myrðo þá alla iam-marga ser.10 Þeir hliópo braut
með konor þeirra ok fé [31], ok bátenn. Þrælarner fóro til eyja þeirra,
es þeir saó til hafs í út-suðr, ok bioggosk þar fyrer um hríð.

Vífill ok Carle héto þrælar Ingolfs; þá sende hann vestr með sió, at
leita aondoges-súlna sínna. En es þeir kómo til Hiaorleifs-haofða15
fundo þeir Hiaorleif dauðan. Þá fóro þeir aftr, ok saogðo Ingolfe
þau tíðende; ok let hann ílla yfer. Efter þat fór Ingolfr vestr til
Hiaorleifs-haofða. Ok es hann sá Hiaorleif dauðan, þá mælte hann:
'Líteð lagðesk her fyr góðan dreng, es þrælar skyldo at bana verða;
ok sé ek svá hverjom verða es eige vill20 blóta.' Ingolfr lét bua
graoft þeirra Hiaorleifs, ok sá fyr skipe þeirra ok feár-hlut.

[[36: i. 8.]] Ingolfr geck þá upp á haofðann, ok sá eyjar liggja til
hafs í út-suðr. Kom hónom þat í hog, at þeir mondo þangat hlaupet
hafa, þvi at bátrenn vas horfenn. Ok fóro þeir at leita þrælanna,
ok fundo þeir þá þar sem Eið heiter í Eyjonom; saóto þeir þá yfer
mat es Ingolfr kom at þeim. Þeir urðo felms-fuller, ok hlióp sínn
veg hverr5 þeirra: Ingolfr drap þá alla.--Þar heiter Dufþacs-skor,
es hann lézk--Fleire hliópo þeir fyr berg þar sem við þá es kennt
síðan. Þar heita síðan Vestmanna-eyjar, es þrælarner [32] vóro drepner,
þvi at þeir vóro Vest-menn. Þeir Ingolfr haofðo með ser konor þeirra
es myrðer haofðo veret. Fóro þeir þá aftr til Hiaorleifs-haofða;10
vas Ingolfr þar vettr annan.

En um sumaret efter fór hann vestr með sió. Hann vas enn þriðja vettr
under Ingolfs-felle fyr vestan Olfos-aó; þar ...... [33] Þau missere
fundo þeir Vífell ok Carle aondoges-súlor hans við Arnar-hvál fyr
norðan Heiðe.15

8. Ingolfr fór um váret ofan um Heiðe. Hann tók ser bú-stað þar sem
aondoges-súlor hans haofðo á land komet. Hann bió í Reykjar-vík--þar
ero enn aondoges-súlor þær í eld-húse.

En Ingolfr nam land miðle Olfus-ár ok Hval-fiarðar, fyr útan
Brynjodals-aó, miðle ok OExar-ár, ok aoll nes út [34]. Þá mælte
Carle:20 [[37: i. 9.]] 'Til illz fóro ver um góð heroð, es ver skolom
byggja út-nes þetta.' Hann hvarf í braut, ok ambaótt með hónom.

Vifle gaf Ingolfr frelse, ok bygðe hann á Vífels-stoðom [35]--við
hann es kent Vífils-fell; þar bió hann lenge, ok vas skilríkr maðr.5

Ingolfr lét goera skála á Skála-felli. Þaðan sá hann reyke við
Olfus-vatn, ok fann þar Carla.

9. Ingolfr es frægastr allra lannáms-manna; þvi at hann kom her at
auðo lande, ok bygðe fyrst [36] landet; ok goerðo aðrer lannáms-menn
efter hans doemom síðan.10

10. Hann átte Hallveigo Fróða dóttor, systor Loftz ens Gamla. Þeirra
son vas Þorsteinn, es þing lét setja á Kialar-nese, áðr Alþingi være
[37] sett: hans son vas Þorkell Máne, laogsaogo-maðr, es einn heiðenna
manna á Islande [38] hefer bazt veret siðaðr at þvi es menn vito doeme
til [39]. Hann lét bera sik í sólar-geisla í hel-sótt [40] sínne, ok15
fal sik á hende þeim Goðe es sólena hefðe skapat. Hann hafðe ok lifat
svá hreinliga, sem þeir Cristner menn es bazt ero siðaðer. Son hans
vas Þormóðr, es þá vas Allzherjar-Goðe es Cristne kom á Ísland. Hans
son vas Hamall, faðer Márs ok Þormóðar ok Torfa. Sigurðr vas son Márs,
f. Hamals, f. Goðmundar, f. Þormóðs20 Skeiða-goða [41].

[[39: i. 10, 11.]] 4. 1. Biorn Buna hét herser ríkr ok ágætr í
Norege; hann vas (son) Veðrar-Gríms hersess or Sogne [42]. Grímr átte
Hervaoro, dóttor Þorgerðar, Eylaugs dóttor hersess or Sogne. Biaorn
átte Vélaugo, systor Vémundar ens Gamla. Þau aótto þriá sono: vas einn
Ketill Flatnefr: annarr Helge: þriðe5 Hrappr. Þeir vóro ágæter menn;
ok es frá þeirra afkvæme mart sagt í þesse bók; ok frá þeim es flest
allt stór-menne komet á Íslande.

2. Hrappr átte Þórunne Groeningja-Riúpo: þeirra son vas Þórðr Skegge;
hann átte Vilborgo, Ósvaldz dóttor konongs ok Ulfrúnar10 ennar Úborno,
dóttor Eatmundar Engla konungs.

3. Þórðr bygðe fyst í Lóne austr tio vettr eðr fimtán. En es hann
frá til aondoges-súlna sínna í Leiro-váge, þá selde hann laond
sín Ulflióte; hann vas son Þóro Haorða-Kára dóttor. En hann fór
vestr með allt sítt ok nam land at ráðe Ingolfs miðle Ulfars-ár ok15
Leiro-vágs-ár, ok bió síðan á Skeggja-staoðom. Hans dótter vas Helga,
es átte Ketilbiaorn enn Gamle at Mosfelle. Frá Þórðe es mart stór-menne
komet á Íslande.

4. Hallr hét maðr, son Þóress Goðlauss, Ormars sonar, bróðor Hildar
Ormars dóttor, es átte Þorbiaorn enn Gaulverske, sam-feðra [43]:20
enn hon vas sam-moedd við Þórð Skeggja. Þeir feðgar vilðo eige blóta,
[[41: i. 11]] ok trúðo á mátt sínn: Hallr fór til Íslannz, ok nam
land með ráðe Ingolfs [44] miðle Mógils-ár ok Leiro-vágs-ár, ok bió í
Múla. Hans son vas Helge, es átte Þóríðe Ketilbiarnar dóttor. Þeirra
son vas Þórðr í Alfs-nese, es átte Goðnyjo Hrafnkels dóttor.

5. Haraldr enn Hárfagre herjaðe vestr um haf, sem ritið [45] es í5
saogo hans. Hann lagðe under sik allar Suðreyjar, svá langt vestr, at
eingi Noregs konunga hefer síðan lengra eignask [útan Magnús konungr
Berbeinn] [46]. En es hann fór vestan, slógosk víkingar í Eyjarnar,
Skottar ok Írar, ok herjoðo ok rænto víða. En es þat spurðe Haraldr
konungr, sende hann vestr Ketil Flatnef,10 son Biarnar Buno, at vinna
aftr Eyjarnar.

Ketill átte Yngvilde, dóttor Ketils Veðrs hersess af Hringa-ríke;
þeirra syner vóro þeir, Biaorn enn Austroene, ok Helge Biolan: Auðr
en Diúpauðga ok Þórunn Hyrna vóro doettr þeirra.

Ketill fór vestr, en sette efter [47] Biaorn son sínn. Hann lagðe15
under sik allar Suðreyjar ok goerðizk haofðinge yfer; en galt oengan
skatt Haralde konunge sem ætlað vas. Þá tók Haraldr konungr under
sik eigner hans í Norege, en rak braut Biaorn son hans.


5. 1. Helge Biolan, son Ketils Flatnefs, fór til Íslannz af
Suðreyjom. Hann vas með Ingolfe enn fyrsta vettr,20 ok nam með hans
ráðe Kialar-nes allt miðle Mógils-ár ok Mýdals-ár; [[42: i. 12.]] hann
bió at Hofe. Hans son vas Víga-Hrappr, ok Eyvindr Hialti, faðer
Kollsveins, faoðor Eyvindar, es átte Þórlaugo Kloeings dóttor. Þeirra
dótter vas Þórgerðr, móðer Þóro, es átte Þórkell, son Ásgeirs Kneifar
[48]: þeirra son vas Ogmundr, faðer Ioans bps [ens Helga].5


6. 1. OErlygr hét son Hrapps, Biarnar sonar Buno; hann vas at fóstre
með Patrece byscope enom Helga í Suðreyjom. Hann fýstesk at fara
til Íslannz, ok bað Patrec byscop, at hann sæe um með hónom. Byscop
feck hónom kirkjo-við, ok bað hann hafa með ser; ok plenarium; ok
iarn-clocko, ok goll-pening;10 ok mold vígða, at hann skylde leggja
under horn-stafe, ok hafa þat fyrer vígslo [49]; ok skylde hann
helga Columcilla.

Þá mælte Patrecr byscop: 'Hvarge es þú tekr land, þá bygðu þar at eins
es sér þriú fiaoll af hafe, ok fiaorð at seá á miðle hvers fiallz,
ok dal í hverjo fialle. Þú skalt sigla at eno synsta fialle;15 þar man
skógr vesa; ok sunnan under fialleno montu rióðr hitta, ok lagða upp,
eðr reista, þriá steina: reistu þar kirkjo ok bu þar.'

2. OErlygr lét í haf, ok sá maðr á aoðro skipe es Collr hét,
fóst-bróðer hans. Þeir haofðo sam-flot. Á skipe vas með OErlyge sá20
maðr es hét Þorbiaorn Sporr; annarr Þorbiaorn Talcne; þriðe [[44:
i. 12.]] Þorbiaorn Scuma: þeir vóro syner Baoðvars Blaoðro-skalla. En
es þeir kómo í land-vaón, goerðe at þeim storm mikenn, ok rak þá
vestr um Ísland. Þá hét OErlygr á Patrec byscop fóstra sínn til
lann-taoko þeim: ok hann skylde af hans nafne gefa oer-nefne þar sem
hann toeke land. Þeir vóro þaðan frá lítla hríð úti, áðr an þeir5
saó land [50]. Hann kom skipe síno í OErlygs-haofn, ok af því kallaðe
hann fiaorðenn Patrecs-fiaorð [51]. En Collr hét á Þór. Þá skilðe í
stormenom, ok kom hann þar sem Collz-vík heiter, ok braut hann þar
skip sítt. Þar vóro þeir um vettrenn. Hásetar hans naómo þar sumer
land, sem enn mon sagt verða.10

3. En um váret bió OErlygr skip sítt, ok siglðe braut með lið [52]
sítt. Ok es hann kom suðr fyr Faxa-ós, þá kende hann fiaoll þau
es hónom vas til vísat. Þar fell útbyrðess iarn-clockan, ok soeck
niðr. En þeir siglðo inn efter firðe, ok tóko þar land sem nú heiter
Sand-vík á Kialar-nese; þar lá þá iarn-clockan í þara-brúke.15

4. Hann bygðe under Esjo-berge at ráðe Helga Biolo frænda síns; ok
nam land á miðle Mógils-ár ok Usvifrs-loekjar. Hann goerðe kirkjo at
Esjo-berge, sem hónom vas boðet. Hialp hét kona hans; þeirra son vas
Valþiófr, es full-tíða kom til Íslannz með OErlyge. Síðan átte OErlygr
Ísgerðe, dóttor Þormods, Bresa20 sonar; þeirra son vas Geirmundr,
faðer Halldóro, es átte Þióstolfr, [[45, 46: i. 13.]] son Biarnar
Gollbera; þeirra son vas Þórleifr es bió at Esjo-berge efter Geirmund
móðor-faoðor sínn. [M: Frá hónom ero Esbergingar komner.] Þeir trúðo
á Columcilla þoat þeir være úskírðer. Þórleifr vas troll-aukenn,
ok tók þó Cristne. Frá hónom es mart manna komet. Dótter OErlygs ok
Ísgerðar vas Vélaug, es átte5 Gunnlaugr Orms-tunga enn Gamle [53],
ok vas þeirra dótter Þóríðr Dylla, móðer Illoga ens Svarta.

5. Svart-cell hét maðr: hann fór af Catanese [54] til Íslannz, ok
nam land fyr innan Mýdals-á [55], ok miðle Eilífsdals-ár, ok bió at
Kiðja-felle fyrst, en síðan á Eyre; hans son vas Þórkell, faðer10
Glúms þess es gamall tók Cristne. Hann baðsk [56] svá fyrer at crosse:
'Gótt æ gaomlom maonnom! Gótt æ oerom [57] maonnom!' Hans son vas
Þórarenn, faðer Glúms á Vatnlauso: Arnleif hét syster Svartcels,
es átte Þórolfr Vili-gisl, faðer Cleppiarns ens Gamla or Flóca-dal:
þeirra dótter vas Hallgerðr, es átte Bergþórr Collz son.15

6. Valþiófr, es fyrr vas geteð, son OErlygs at Esjo-berge; hann
nam Ciós alla, ok bió at Meðal-felle; Þorbiaorn Collr het son hans,
faðer Hallveigar, es átte Þórðr Lambe--þat es Valþyflinga-kyn. Signý
hét dótter Valþiófs, es Signýjar-staðer ero við kender; hána
átte Grímkell, son Biarnar Gollbera; þeirra syner vóro þeir20
[[46: i. 14.]] Haorðr,--es drepenn vas í Geirs-holme,--ok
Gnúpr, faðer Birnings, faoðor Gnúps, faoðor Eiríks Groenlendinga
byscops. Valbrandr hét annarr son Valþiófs, faðer Torfa es fyrst
bió á Maoðro-vaollom. Þeir feðgar goerðo félag við Tungo-Odd--Af því
bioggo þeir síðan á Breiða-bólstað í Reykjardal-enom-noerðra. Torfe
vas5 faðer Þorkels at Skáneyjo, es átte Arngerðe, dóttor Þorkels
Svart-Cetels sonar.

7. Hvamm-Þórer nam land á miðle Lax-ár ok Fors-ár, ok bió í
Hvamme. Hann deilðe við Ref um kú þá es Brynja hét, ok Brynjo-dalr
es við kendr. Sú kvíga hafðe horfet Þóre fyr10 laongo; en sú kvíga
fansk í Brynjo-dale, þar es Refr átte land, ok fiórer tiger nauta með
henne, þeirra es aoll vóro frá henne komen; ok haofðo genget sialf-ala
úte. Því kende hvárr-tveggi ser nauten. En Þórer féll fyrer Ref með
átta mann, þá es þeir baorðosk hiá hólom þeim es síðan ero kallaðer
Þóres-hólar.15

8. Þórolfr Smior, es fyrr vas geteð, vas son Þorsteins Scrofa,
Gríms sonar þess es blótenn vas dauðr fyre þokka-sælð, ok kallaðr
Camban. Son Þórolfs Smiors vas Solmundr, faðer Þórsteins þess es land
nam í Brynjodale, á miðle Bláskeggs-ár ok Fors-ár [58]; hann átte
Þórbiaorgo Cotlo, dóttor Helga Skarfs, Geirleifs sonar, es nam20
Barða-straond; þeirra son vas Refr í Brynjodale, faðer Halldóro,
[[47, 48: i. 15.]] es átte Sigfúss Elliða-Gríms son [59]; þeirra
dótter Þorgerðr, móðer Sigfúss, faoðor Sæmundar prestz ens Fróða.

Nú ero talðer þeir menn es buet hafa í lannáme Ingolfs, vestr frá
hónom. [60]


7. 1. Avangr hét maðr Írskr, es bió í Botne fyrstr manna;5 ok bió
þar allan alðr sínn. Þá vas þar svá stórr skógr, at hann goerðe þar
haf-skip af; ok hlóð þar sem nú heiter Hlað-hamarr. Hans son vas
Þorleifr, faðer Þóríðar, es átte Þormodr Þióstars son á Alftanese,
ok son Iðunnar Molda-Gnúps [61] dóttor; þeirra son vas Baorkr, faðer
Þórðar, faoðor Auðunnar í10 Brautar-holte. [62]

2. Þormodr enn Gamle ok Cetill Bresa syner fóro af Írlande til Íslannz,
ok naómo Akranes allt, á miðle Aurriða-ár ok Calmans-ár. Þeir vóro
Írsker--Calman vas ok Írskr, es aóen es við kend, ok bió fyrst
í Catanese: þeir broeðr skifto laondom með ser, svá at15 Þormodr
átte fyr sunnan Reyne ok til Calmans-ár, ok bió at Holme-enom-iðra:
en Cetell bróðer hans átte fyr vestan Reyne, ok fyr norðan Akra-fell
til Aurriða-ár; Berse hét son hans, faðer Þórgestz, faoðor Starra at
Holme, faoðor Knattar, faoðor Ásdísar, es átte Kloeingr Snæbiarnar
son [?] Hafnar-Orms. Geirlaug vas20 dótter Þormods ens Gamla, móðer
Tungo-Oddz.

[[50: i. 16.]] 3. Iaorundr enn Cristne vas son Cetils Bresa sonar;
hann bió í Iaorundar-holte--þat es nú kallat í Gaorðom.--Hann
hélt vel Cristne til dauða-dags, ok vas einseto-maðr í elle sínne.
Son Iaorundar vas Cleppr, faðer Einars, faoðor Narfa. Hávarr hét
annarr son Clepps, faðer Þórgeirs. Eðna hét dótter Cetels Bresa5
sonar; hon vas gift á Írlande þeim manne es Conall hét; þeirra son
vas Ásolfr Alscic, es í þann tíma fór af Írlande til Íslannz ok kom
í Austfiaorðo. Hann kom út austr í Ósom. Hann vas Cristenn vel ok
vilðe ecke eiga við heiðna menn, ok eige vilðe hann þiggja mat at
þeim. [63]10

4. Þeir fóro tolf saman austan þar til es þeir kómo at garðe Þórgeirs
ens Haorðzka í Hollte under Eyja-fiaollom, ok setto þar tiald sítt;
en faoro-nautar hans þrír vóro þá siúker. Þeir aondoðosk þar--en Ioan
[64] prestr Þórgeirs son, faðer Gríms í Holte, fann bein þeirra, ok
flutte til kirkjo--Síðan goerðe Ásolfr ser skála--því nær15 sem nú
es kirkjo-hornet at Ásolfs-skála--at ráðe Þórgeirs, þvi at Þórgeirr
vilðe þá eige hafa við hús sín.

Á féll við skála Ásolfs sialfan--þat vas aondorðan vettr--aóen varð
þegar full með fiskom. Þórgeirr sagðe, at þeir sæte í veiðe-staoð
hans. Síðan fór Ásolfr braut þaðan; goerðe annan skála20 vestar
við aðra aó--Sú heiter Ír-aó, þvi at þeir vóro Írsker--En es [[50:
i. 16.]] menn kómo til árennar, vas hon full með fiskom, sva at
slíkt undr þóttosk menn eige séð hafa, en brauto vas allt or enne
eystre aónne. Þá raóko héraðs-menn þá braut þaðan; ok fór hann þá
til ens vestasta skálans. Fór allt á saomo leið. Boendr kaolloðo
þá fiol-kunga; en Þórgeirr kvezk hyggja at þeir mondo vesa góðer5
menn. Um váret fóro þeir braut ok vestr á Akra-nes. Hann goerðe bú
at Holme á Kirkjo-bólstað.

5. Hans sun vas Solve, faðer Þórhildar, es átte Brandr, son Þórgríms
Ceallacs sonar: þeirra son vas Þórleifr, faðer Bárðar, faoðor Iófríðar,
es átte Arne Torfo son: þeirra dótter Helga, es10 átte Arngrímr
Goðmundar son.

6. En es Ásolfr eldizk, goerðesk hann einseto-maðr. Þar vas kofe hans
sem nú es kirkjan, þar andaðesk hann, ok vas þar grafenn at Holme. En
þá es Halldórr, son Illoga ens Rauða, bió þar, þá vanðesk fiós-kona
ein at þerra foetr sína á þúfo þeirre15 es vas á leiðe Ásolfs. Hána
dreymðe, at Ásolfr ávítaðe hána um þat, es hon þerðe foetr sína saurga
á húse hans: 'En þá mono vit saótt,' seger hann, 'ef þú seger Halldóre
draum þínn.' Hon sagðe hónom; ok kvað hann ecke mark á því es konor
dreymðe; ok gaf ecke gaum at: en es Hroðolfr byskop fór braut or Boe,
þar20 es hann hafðe buet í munk-lífe xix vettr [65], þá vóro þar
efter munkar þrír. Einn þeirra dreymðe, at Ásolfr mælte við hann:
'Sentú húskarl þínn til Halldórs at Holme, ok kaup at hónom þúfo þá,
[[51: i. 16.]] es á fiós-gaoto es, ok gef við maork silfrs.' Munkrenn
goerðe svá. Húskarlenn gat keypta þúfona, ok gróf síðan iaorðena,
ok hitte þar mannz-bein; hann tók upp ok fór heim með. Ena næsto nótt
efter dreymðe Halldór, at Ásolfr kom at hónom, ok kvezk bæðe augo mondo
sprengja or hause hónom, nema hann keypte5 bein hans slíko verðe sem
hann selðe. Halldórr keypte bein Ásolfs, ok lét goera at tré-skrín,
ok lét setja yfer altare. Halldórr sende Illoga son sínn út [66] efter
kirkjo-viðe. En es hann fór útan aftr, es hann kom miðle Reykja-ness
ok Snæfellz-ness [67], þá náðe hann eige fyre stýre-maonnom at taka
land þar es hann vilðe. Þá10 bar hann fyr borð kirkjo-viðenn allan,
ok bað þar koma sem Ásolfr vilðe. En Austmenn kómo vestr í Vaðil
[68]. En þrimr nóttom síðarr kom viðrenn á Kirkjo-sand at Holme;
nema tvau tré kómo á Raufar-nes á Mýrom. Halldórr lét goera kirkjo
... [69] xxx [70], ok viðe þakða, ok helgaðe Columcilla með Goðe.15

7. Colgrímr enn Gamle,--son [71] Hrolfs hersess ok Unnar Hákonar
dóttor, Griótgarðz sonar iarls,--es Griótgarðz-haugr es við
kenndr fyr sunnan Agða-nes--fór or Þróndheime til Íslannz, ok nam
Hvalfiarðar-straond ena nerðre frá Bláskeggs-aó til Lax-ár, ok út til
loekjar þess es fellr út frá Saurboe; ok bió á Ferstiklo. Hans son20
[[53: i. 17.]] vas Þórhalle, faðer Colgríms, faoðor .... steins
[72], faoðor Cvistz, faoðor Cala: Bergþóra vas dótter Colgríms,
es átte Refr í Brynjo­dale.

8. Finnr enn Auðge, son Halldórs, Hoegna sonar, fór or Stafangre
til Íslannz: hann átte Þórvaoro, dóttor Þorbiarnar frá5 Mosfelle,
Hraða [73] sonar. Hann nam land fyr sunnan Lax-aó til Calmans-ár;
hann bió í Miðfelle: hans son vas Þórgeirr, faðer Ió-steins [74],
faoðor Þórunnar .... [m. Guðrúnar, m. Sæmundar, f. Brandz byscops]:
Skegge í Skógom vas son Þórunnar, faðer Styrmess ok Bolla í Skógom.10

9. Becan hét maðr, es nam land inn frá Berjadals-aó til Aurriða-ár,
ok bió á Becans-staoðom í lannáme Cetels.

10. Hallkell, es nam Hvítár-síðo, bió fyrstr á Akra-nese á
Hallkels-staoðom, áðr Bresa syner raóko hann braut. En es hann fór
efter fé síno því es þar hafðe sialf-ala úte genget, vas hann15
drepenn; ok es þar heygðr.

11. Hafnar-Ormr fór or Stafangre til Íslannz, ok nam aoll laond um
Mela-hverfe út til Aurriða-ár ok Lax-ár, ok inn til Andakíls-ár, ok
bió í Haofn. Hans son vas Þórgeirr Hoeggven-kinne, faðer Þórunnar,
móðor Þórunnar, móðor Ió-steins, [f. Sigurðar, f. Biarn-heðins].20
Þorgeirr Hoeggvinn-kinne [75] vas hirðmaðr Hákonar ko­nongs [[54, 55:
i. 18.]] Aðalsteins-fóstra; hann feck á Fitjom kinnar-sár ok orð gótt.

12. Broeðr tveir bioggo í lannáme Finnz ok Orms, Hroðgeirr enn Spake í
Saurboe, en Oddgeirr at Leir-aó. En þeir Finnr ok Ormr keypto þá braut,
þvi at þeim þótte þar [76] þroeng-lennt. Þeir5 broeðr naómo síðan
laond í Floa [77], Hraungerðinga-hrepp; ok bió Þórgeirr í Hraun-gerðe,
en Oddgeirr í Oddgeirs-hólom: hann átte dóttor Cetels Gufo.

13. Hafnar-Ormr es þar heygðr í haofðanom framm frá boenom í Haofn,
sem hann tók land.10


8. 1. Ulbr hét maðr, son Brunda-Bialba, ok Hallbero, dóttor Ulfs ens
Óarga or Hrafnisto: Ulbr átte Sal­biaorgo, dóttor Berdlo-Kára; hann vas
kallaðr Kveld-Ulbr: Þórolfr ok Skalla-Grímr vóro syner þeirra. Haraldr
konungr Hárfagre lét drepa Þórolb norðr í Alost á Sandnese af róge
Hildi­ríðar-sona;15 þat vilde Haraldr konungr eige boeta. Þá bioggo
þeir Grímr ok Kveld-Ulbr kaup-skip, ok ætloðo til Íslannz, þvi at
þeir haofðo þar spurt til Ingolfs vinar síns. Þeir laógo til hafs í
Solundom. Þar tóko þeir knaorr þann es Haraldr konungr lét taka fyre
Þórolbe, þá es menn hans vóro ný-komner af Englande, ok draópo20 þar
Hallvarð Harðfara, ok Sigtrygg Snarfara, es því haofðo valdet. [[56:
i. 18.]] Þar draópo þeir ok sono Guthorms, Sigurðar sonar Hiartar,
broeðr­unga konongs, ok alla skips-haofn þeirra; nema tvá menn es
þeir léto segja konunge tíðenden. Þeir bioggo hvárt-tveggja skipet
til Íslannz, ok þriá tige manna á hvaóro; stýrðe Kveld-Ulbr því es
þá vas fenget.5

Grímr enn Háleyske, Þóres son, Gunnlaugs sonar, Hrolfs sonar, Ketils
sonar Kiólfara, vas forráða-maðr með Kveld-Ulbe á því skipe es hann
stýrðe. Þeir vissosk iamnan til í hafino. Ok es miok sóttesk hafet,
þá tók Kveld-Ulbr sótt. Hann bað þess at kisto skylde goera at líke
hans, ef hann doee; ok bað svá segja10 Gríme syne sínom, at hann
toeke skamt þaðan bú-stað á Íslande, es kista hans koeme á land, ef
þess yrðe auðet. Efter þat andaðesk Kveld-Ulbr, ok vas skoteð fyr borð
kisto hans. Þeir Grímr héldo suðr um landet, þvi at þeir haofðo spurt,
at Ingolbr bygðe sunnan á landeno. Siglðo þeir vestr fyr Reykja-nes,
ok stefndo15 þar inn á fiaorðenn. Skilðe þá með þeim, svá at hváreger
visso til annarra. Siglðo þeir Grímr enn Háleyske allt inn á fiaorðenn,
þar til es þraut sker aoll, ok kaostoðo þar ackerom sínom. En es flóð
goerðe, fluttosk þeir upp í ár-ós einn, ok leiddo þar upp skipet sem
geck--Su aó heiter nú Guf-á--Baóro þeir þar á land faong sín.20 En
es þeir kaonnoðo landet, þá haofðo þeir skamt genget út frá skipeno,
áðr þeir fundo kisto Kveld-Ulbs rekna í vík eina. Þeir baóro hána á
þat nes es þar vas, ok hlóðo at grióte.

[[57: i. 19.]] Skalla-Grímr kom þar at lande es nú heiter Knarrar-nes
á Mýrom. Síðan kannaðe hann landet, ok vas þar mýr-lende miket, ok
skógar víðer langt á miðle fiallz ok fiaoro. En es þeir fóro inn með
firðenom, kómo þeir á nes þat es þeir fundo alfter--þat kaolloðo þeir
Alfta-nes--þeir létto eige fyrr, an þeir fundo þá5 Grím enn Háleyska;
saogðo þeir Gríme allt um ferðer sínar, ok svá hver orð Kveld-Ulbr
hafðe sent Gríme syne sínom. Skalla-Grímr geck til at siá hvar kistan
hafðe á land komet; hugðesk hónom svá, at skamt þaðan moende vesa
ból-staðr góðr. Skalla-Grímr vas þar um vettrenn sem hann kom af hafe,
ok kannaðe þá10 allt herað.

Hann nam land útan frá Sela-Lóne, ok et oefra til Borgar-hrauns,
ok suðr allt til Hafnar-fialla, herat allt svá vítt sem vatn-faoll
deila til sióvar. Hann reiste boe hiá vík þeirre es kista Kveld-Ulbs
kom á land, ok kallaðe at Borg; ok svá kallaðe hann15 fiaorðenn
Borgar-fiaorð.

Síðan skipaðe hann heraðet sínom félaogom, ok þar naómo marger menn
síðan land með hans ráðe.

2. Skalla-Grímr gaf land Gríme enom Háleyska fyr sunnan fiaorð, á
miðle Anda-kíls-ár ok Gríms-ár. Hann bió at Hvann-eyre:20 Ulbr hét
son hans, faðer Hrolfs í Geitlande.

3. Þorbiaorn [78] Svarte hét maðr: hann keypte land at Hafnar-Orme inn
frá Sela-eyre, ok upp til Fors-ár. Hann bió á Skelja-brecko; [[58:
i. 20.]] hans son vas Þórvarðr, es átte Þórunne, dóttor Þórbiarnar
or Arnar-holte; þeirra syner vóro þeir Þórarenn Blinde ok Þórgisl
[79] Orra-skald, es vas með Áláfi Cvaran í Dyflinne.

4. Score, leysinge Cetels Gufu, nam Scora-dal fyr ofan vatn; ok vas
þar drepenn.5


9. 1. Biorn Gollbere nam Reykja-dal-enn-Syðra [80], ok bió á
Gollbera-staoðom; hans son vas Grímkell Goðe í Bláskógom; hann átte
Signýjo Valbrannz dóttor, Valþiófs sonar; þeirra son vas Haorðr, es
vas fyre Holms-maonnom. Biaorn Gollbere átte Liótunne, systor Colgríms
ens Gamla: Svarthaofðe at10 Reyðar-felle vas annarr son þeirra; hann
átte Þórríðe Tungo-Oddz dóttor; þeirra dótter Þórdís es átte Guðlaugr
enn Auðge: Þióst­olbr vas enn þriðe son Biarnar: fiórðe Geirmundr.

2. Þorgeirr Meldun þá laond aoll at Birne fyr ofan Gríms-aó; hann bió
í Tungo-felle; hann átte Geirbiaorgo, dóttor Balca or15 Hrúta-firðe:
þeirra son vas Véleifr enn Gamle.

3. Flóke, þræll Gufo, nam Flóka-dal, ok vas þar drepenn.

4. Áleifr Hialte hét maðr gaofogr. Hann kom skipe síno í Borgar-fiaorð,
ok vas enn fyrsta vettr með Skalla-Gríme. Hann nam land, at ráðe
Skalla-Gríms, miðle Gríms-ár ok Geirs-ár, ok20 bió at Varma-loek:
hans syner vóro þeir, Rage í Laugar-dale, ok [[60: i. 20.]] Þórarenn
Laogsaogo-maðr, es átte Þórdíse, dóttor Áláfs Feilans: þeirra dótter
Vígdís, es átte Steinn Þórfinnz son: son Raga vas Goðþormr [81],
faðer Gunnvarar, móðor Þórnýjar, móðor Þórlacs, faoðor Rúnolfs,
faoðor Þorlacs byscops.

5. Cetell Blundr ok Geirr son hans kómo til Íslannz, ok vóro5
með Skalla-Gríme enn fyrsta vettr. Þá feck Geirr Þórunnar, dóttor
Skalla-Gríms. Um váret efter vísaðe Grímr þeim til landa, ok naómo
þeir upp frá Flókadals-aó til Reykjadals-ár; ok tungo þá alla upp
til Rauðs-gils; ok Flóka-dal allan fyr ofan Breckor: Cetell bió í
Þróndar-holte [82]--Við hann es kent Blundz-vatn; þar10 bió hann síðan.

6. Geirr enn Auðge, son hans, bió í Geirs-hlíð, en átte annat bú
at Reykjom enom oefrom: hans syner vóro þeir Þórgeirr Blundr; ok
Blund-Ketell; ok Svart-kell [83] á Eyre. Dótter Geirs vas Bergdís,
es Gnúpr átte, Flóka son, í Hrísom: þeirrar ættar vas15 Þóroddr
Hrísa-Blundr.


10. 1. Onundr Breiðskeggr vas son Ulfars, Ulfs sonar Fitjom-skeggja,
Þóres sonar Hlamanda [84]: Onundr nam Tungo alla miðle Hvít-ár ok
Reykjadals-ár, ok bió á Breiðabólstað. Hann átte Geirlaugo, dóttor
Þormodar á Akranese,20 systor Bersa: þeirra son vas Tungo-Oddr;
en Þórodda [85] hét dótter þeirra; hennar feck Torbi, son Valbrannz,
Valþiófs sonar, OErlygs [[61: i. 20.]] sonar frá Esjo-berge, ok fylgðe
henne heiman halbr Breiðaból­staðr ok Halsa-land með. Hann gaf Signýjo
systor sínne Sig­nýjar-staðe, ok bió hon þar.

2. Torbe drap Kropps-menn tolb saman: ok hann réð mest fyre drápe
Holms-manna: ok hann vas á Helliss-fitjom, ok Illoge5 enn Svarte,
ok Sturla Goðe, þá es þar vóro drepner xviii Helliss-menn: en Auðun
Smiðcels son brendo þeir inne á Þorvarðz-staoðom: sonr Torba vas
Þórkell at Skáney.

3. Tungo-Oddr átte Iórunne Helga dóttor: þeirra baorn vóro þau
Þórvaldr, es réð brenno Blund-Cetils; ok Þóroddr es átte10 Iófríðe
Gunnars dóttor; þeirra dótter Húngerðr, es átte Svertingr Hafr-biarnar
son. Dótter Tungo-Oddz vas Þóríðr, es Þorfinnr Sel-Þóris son átte;
ok Hallgerðr, es Hallbiaorn átte, son Oddz frá Kiðia-berge.

4. Ciolvaor vas móðor-syster Tungo-Oddz, es bió á Ciolvarar-staoðom,15
móðer Þórleifar, móðor Þóríðar, móðor þeirra Gunn­hildar, es Kale
[86] átte; ok Glúms, faoðor Þórarens, faoðor Glúms at Vatnlauso.

[M*: Kromu-Oddr het maðr ágætr: hann nam Reykjadal enn nyrðra,
ok alla Tungu á miðle Reykjadals-ár ok Hvít-ár, ok upp til20
Deilðar-gils. Hans son vas Onundr es átte Þórlaugo Þórmóðs dóttor:
þeirra son vas Tungu-Oddr es bió á Breiðabólstað.]

[[62: i. 21.]]

5.  [87]Rauðr hét maðr, es nam land upp frá Rauðs-gile til Gilja;
ok bió at Rauðs-gile. Hans syner vóro þeir Ulfr á Ulfs-staoðom; ok
Auðr á Auðs-staoðom fyr norðan aó, es Haorðr vá. Ok þaraf goerðesk
Saga Harðar Grímkels sonar ok Geirs.

6. Grímr hét maðr, es nam land et syðra upp frá Giljom til5 Gríms-gils,
ok bió við Gríms-gil. Hans syner vóro þeir Þórgils Auga á Auga-staoðom;
ok Hrane á Hrana-staoðom, faðer Gríms es kallaðr vas Stafn-Grímr;
hann bió á Stafngríms-staoðom--þat heiter nú á Sigmundar-staoðom. Þar
gegnt fyr norðan Hvít-aó við sialfa aóna es haugr hans; þar vas
hann vegenn.10

7. Þorkell Corna-múle nam Ás enn syðra frá Collz-loek til Deilðar-gils,
ok bió í Áse: hans son vas Þorbergr Corna-múle, es átte Álofo
Elliða-skiaold, dóttor Ófeigs ok Ásgerðar, systor Þorgeirs Gollnes
[88]: þeirra baorn vóro þau Eysteinn ok Hafþóra, es átte Eiðr Skeggja
son, es síðan bió í Áse--Þar dó Miðfiarðar-Skegge;15 ok es þar haugr
hans fyr neðan garð. Annarr son Skeggja vas Collr es bió at Collz-loek.

Syner Eiðs vóro Eysteinn ok Illoge.


11. 1. Ulfr, son Gríms ens Háleyska ok Svanlaugar, dóttor Þormodar
af Akranese systor Bresa:--hann Ulfr20 nam land á miðle Hvít-ár ok
Suðr-iaokla; ok bió í Geitlande. [[63: i. 21.]] Hans syner vóro þeir
Hrólfr enn Auðge, faðer Halldóro, es átte Gitzorr Hvíte; þeirra dótter
Vilborg, es átte Hialte Skeggja son.

2. Annarr son hans vas Hróaldr, faðer Hrólfs ens Yngra, es átte
Þóríðe Valþjófs dóttor, OErlygs sonar ens Gamla: þeirra baorn vóro þau
Ceallakr at Lunde í Syðra-dal, faoðor Collz, faoðor5 Bergþórs. Annarr
vas Solve í Geitlande, faðer Þórðar í Reykja-holte.

3. Þriðe son Hrólfs vas Illoge enn Rauðe, es fyrstr bió í
Hrauns-áse; hann [89] átte þá Sigríðe, dóttor Þórarens ens Ílla,
systor Músa-Baolverks; þann bú-stað gaf hann Bolverk; en Illoge fór
þá at10 bua á Hofs-staoðom í Reykjar-dale [90]; þvi at Geitlendingar
aótto at halda upp hofe þvi at helminge við Tungo-Odd. Síðarst bió
hann at Holme-Iðra á Akra-nese; þvi at hann keypte við Holm-Starra
bæðe laondom ok konom, ok fé aollo. Þá feck Illoge Iórunnar, dóttor
Þormodar Þióstars sonar af Alfta-nese. En Sigríðr hengðe15 sik í
hofino; þvi at hon vilðe eige manna-kaupen [91].

4. Hrólfr enn Yngre gaf Þórlaugo Gyðjo, dóttor sína, Odda [92] Ýrar
syne. Því rézk Hrólfr [93] vestr til Ballar-ár, ok bió þar lenge;
ok vas kallaðr Hrólfr at Ballar-aó.






I. Here beginneth the Book of the Settlements, and there is told in
the first chapters the shortest way to Iceland.

* In the days when Iceland was found and settled from Norway, Adrianus
was pope in Rome, and John, he who was the eighth of that name, in
the apostolic see, and Hlodwe [Hlodwig] Hlodwe's son Kayser north
of the Mount [Alps], and Leo and Alexander [Alexios] his son over
Mickle-garth [Byzantium]: Harold Fairhair was then king over Norway,
and Eiric Eymundsson over Sweeric [Sweden], and Beorn his son, and
Gorm [Goth-thorm] the old in Denmark, Elfrad [Ælfræd] the mighty
in England and Eatward [Eadweard] his son, and Cearwall [Cearball]
at Dyflin [Dublin], Sigrod the mighty Earl at the Orkneys.


1. 1. Wise men say that out of Norway from Stead [Cape Stadt] there
be seven days' [24 hours'] sailing west to Horn on the eastward
of Iceland.

But from Snowfellsness, where it is shortest, there is four days'
sailing to Cape Wharf in Greenland.

* From Horn from Norway one must sail ever west to Wharf [Farewell]
in Greenland, and then the course sailed is north of Shetland, within
sight of land, if there be a very clear day, and south of Faereys,
so that the sea be half-way up the slopes, and so to the south of
Iceland, so as to get to [that distance from the coast, where you meet]
the fowl and whales.

From Reekness on the southward of Iceland it is eight [MS. three]
days' sea to Mare's leap in Ireland southward.

And from Longness on the northward of Iceland it is four days' sea
to Swal-bard north in Sea-bottom [the Arctic islands and ice-floes].

And it is one day's sailing to Greenland out of Colbansey in the north.


2. 1. There was a man named Gard-here, the son of Swawar the Sweenish
[Swede]; he owned lands in Sealand, but was born in Swee-ric
[Sweden]. He journeyed to the Southern isles [Sodor] to get in the
inheritance of his wife's father. But as he was sailing through
Petland's frith [Peht-land-frith our Pentland] a gale broke his
moorings, and he was driven west into the sea. He made land east of
Horn [Cape Horn], there was a haven there then. Gard-here sailed round
about the land and found that it was an island. He came upon a frith,
which he called the Quaker. Then they put out their boat, and aboard
her went Night-fare his thrall. Then the moorings broke, and he came
ashore in Night-fare's bay, out east of Scugga-berg [Shadow-rocks];
but Gard-here came ashore on the other side of the frith, and stayed
there through the winter, wherefore he called it House-wick. Night-fare
stayed behind with his thrall and his bondmaid. Wherefore the place
is called Nightfare-wick. Gard-here sailed back East, and praised
the land much, and called it Gard-here's holm.

2. There was a man named Naddodh, the brother of Oxen-Thori,
the brother-in-law of Alwe Bairn-carle. He was a great wicking,
wherefore he took up his abode in the Faereys, for he had no place
of good peace elsewhere [he was outlawed everywhere else]. He went
out from Norway wishing to go to the islands [Faereys], but he was
sea-borne to Gard-here's holm, and made Reyd-frith in East-friths,
and then they walked up the highest mountain to see if they could
see any abode of men or smoke, but they saw no token [MS. tidings]
thereof. But as they sailed away from the land there fell a great snow,
wherefore they called it Snow-land. They praised the land much.


Parallel Text from Sturla's-book.


Of Naddodh.

It is thus told, that there were certain men who were intending to
journey out of Norway to the Faereys, some name Naddodh the wicking
as being one of them. But they were driven west into the sea, and
there they found a great land. They walked up a high mountain in the
East-friths, and looked far and wide to see if they could see smoke
or any token that the land was settled, but they saw none. They went
back at harvest-tide to the Faereys, and as they sailed from the land
there fell great snow upon the hills, wherefore they called the land
Snow-land. They praised the land much.

The place is now called Reyd-fell in the East-friths, where they
came ashore.

So said priest Sæmund the historian.


Of Gard-here.

There was a man whose name was Gard-here Swawarsson, Sweenish [Swedish]
by kin; he went to seek Snow-land by the direction of his mother,
who had second sight. He made the land east at Cape East Horn. There
was then a haven there. Gard-here sailed round about the land, and
saw that it was an island. He stayed through the winter in the north
at House-wick in the Quaker, and set up a house there. In the spring
when he was ready for sea, there was torn from him the boat with a man
on board, whose name was Night-fare, and his thrall and bondmaid. He
settled there afterwards at a place called Night-fare-wick. Then
Gard-here went to Norway and praised the land much.

He was the father of Une, the father of Hrodgar, the gode or priest
o' Tongue.

After that the land was called Gardhere's Holm, and there was then
wood between fell and foreshore. [Here ends the double text.]

3. Floci Wilgerdsson was the name of a great wicking. He set out from
Roga-land to seek the Snow-land. They lay in Smear-sound. He made
ready a great sacrifice, and hallowed three ravens, which were to tell
him his way, (for sea-sailors had then no load-stone at that time
in the North.) They built a cairn when the sacrifice had been made,
and they called it Floce's beacon or cairn. It stands at the place
where Horda-land and Roga-land meet. He first went to the Shetlands,
and lay in Floce's voe or bay. Then his daughter Gar-hild was lost
in Gar-hild's mere. With Floce there was on board a franklin named
Thor-wolf, and another [named] Here-wolf, and Faxe, a South Island-man.

From there Floce sailed to the Faereys, and then he gave his daughter
in marriage. From her is come Thrond o' Gate.

Thence he sailed out to sea with the three ravens which he had hallowed
in Norway. But where and when he let loose the first, he flew back
to the bows; the second flew up in the air and back to the ship;
the third flew forth from the bows to the quarter where they found
the land. They made it on the east at Horn. Then they sailed along
the south of the land. But when they sailed west round Reek-ness
and the frith began to open, so that they could see Snowfellsness,
Faxe said, 'This must be a big country which we have found; here are
great rivers.' It was afterwards called Faxe's mouth or oyce. Floce
and his men sailed west across the Broad-frith, and then went in
towards the land in a frith called Waters-frith or River-frith, over
against Bard-strand. The whole frith was full of fish [fish, seals,
and whales], and for the sake of the fishing they took no heed to
make hay, and all their live stock died in the winter. It was then
very cold. Then Floce walked northward to a mountain whence he could
see a frith full of sea-ice, [wherefore?] they called the land Iceland.

They went away in the summer, and were ready to sail late. * There
is still to be seen the enclosure of their hall east of Brian's-beck,
and also their dock, and also their cooking-place.

They could not double Reekness, and there the boat was torn from them,
and Here-wolf aboard it. He made land at Here-wolf's haven. Floce
came into Haven-frith. They found a [stranded] whale on an eyre
or tongue of gravel to the west of the frith, and called the place
Whale-eyre. There they met Here-wolf.

That summer they sailed to Norway. Floce spoke evil of the country. But
Here-wolf told the best and the worst of the country, and Thor-wolf
said that butter dripped out of every blade of grass in the country
that they had found. Wherefore he was called Thor-wolf Butter.


[Here beginneth what is told of the Settlers.]

3. 1. There was a man named Beorn-wolf, and another named
Hrod-wald. They were the sons of Hrod-mund Gripsson. They went abroad
out of Thela-mark by reason of manslaughter, and took up their abode
in Dale-frith at Fiolom. The son of Beorn-wolf was Erne, father of
Ing-wolf and Helga, but Hrod-wald's son was Hrod-mere, father of
Laf or Leif. Leif's mother was Hrod-ny, daughter of Cetil Bifra,
the son of Horda-Care.

2. Ing-wolf and Leif, sworn brethren, went a-warring with the sons
of Earl Atle the Slender of Gaula, Ha-stan, Her-stan and Holm-stan,
and they were all friendly together. And when they came home they
agreed to go forth in fellowship with them another summer. But in
the winter the sworn brethren made a feast for the sons of Earl Atle,
and at this feast Holm-stan took a vow to get Helga, Erne's daughter,
to wife, and to marry [lit. own] no other woman. Most men misliked
this vow, but Leif turned red, and there was little love between him
and Holm-stan when they parted at the feast.

The spring after the sworn brethren got ready to go a-warring,
and were minded to go and meet the sons of Earl Atle. They met off
Hisa-gable, and Holm-stan and his brother at once began to fight with
the sworn brethren. But when they had fought together for awhile,
Aul-mod the Old came up, the son of Horda-Care, a kinsman of Leif,
and gave help to Ing-wolf and Leif. In this battle fell Holm-stan,
but Her-stan fled. Then Leif and his fellows went a-warring. And in
the next winter Her-stan set out with a mind to fall upon Leif and his
fellows and slay them, but they got a report of his coming and went
to meet him, and they fought a battle and there Her-stan fell. After
that men were sent to Earl Atle and Ha-stan to offer terms of peace,
and they were set at one on the terms that Leif and his fellows should
pay their lands as weregild to Atle and Ha-stan.

3. And the sworn brethren fitted out a big ship to go and seek the
land which Raven-Floce had found, and which was called Iceland. They
found the land and stayed in East-friths in South Elfets-frith. They
thought the land was better south than north. They were one winter
in the land, and then they went back to Norway.

4. After this Ing-wolf got all his stock together to go to Iceland,
but Leif went on cruising in the West [British Islands]. He harried
in Ireland, and found a great earth-house there, and went in there,
and it was dark inside till light shone from a weapon which a man
was holding. This man Leif slew, and took the sword and much other
riches. After this he was called Sword-Leif or Heor-leif. Heor-leif
harried far and wide in Ireland and got great booty there. Then he
took captive ten thralls that were called Duf-thac [Dubh-thach]
and Geir-rod, Sceald-beorn, Hall-dor and Draf-drit. There are no
more named. After this Heor-leif went to Norway, and there he found
Ing-wolf, his sworn brother. He had before this taken to wife Helga,
Erne's daughter, the sister of Ing-wolf.

5. That winter Ing-wolf made ready a great sacrifice, and enquired of
the oracle as to his coming life or fate; but Heor-leif would never
sacrifice. The oracle advised Ing-wolf to go to Iceland. After
that each of the brothers-in-law fitted out his ship to go to
Iceland. Ing-wolf had on board their common stock, but Heor-leif had
his booty. They put to sea when they were ready, and sailed west.

6. That summer in which Ing-wolf and Heor-leif went to settle
in Iceland, king Harold Fairhair had been twelve years king in
Norway. There was then past from the beginning of this Age and from
the time when Adam was created 6073 winters [reckoning AC. to be 5199
AM.], and from the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ 874 winters.

7. They kept company till they saw Iceland; then they were parted. But
as soon as Ing-wolf saw land, he pitched his porch-pillars overboard
to get an omen, saying as he did so, that he would settle where the
pillars should come ashore. Ing-wolf turned to shore at the place which
is now called Ing-wolf's Head. But Heor-leif was driven westward off
the land, and he and his men grew short of water. Then the Irish
thralls took to the plan of kneading meal and butter together,
and they declared that this was a thirst-slake. They called it
minn-thac. But when this was made ready there came a great rain,
and then they caught water on the awnings. And when the minn-thac
began to grow mouldy they heaved it overboard, and it drifted ashore
at the place that is now called Minn-thac's eyre.

Heor-leif turned to the shore off Heor-leif's Head, and there
was a frith there, and the bottom of the frith turned towards the
headland. Heor-leif built two halls, and the toft [enclosure] of
the one is 18 fathoms and the other 19 fathoms [long]. Heor-leif sat
there through the winter.

But in the spring he wished to sow. He had one ox only, and he made
his thralls drag the plough. But when Heor-leif and his men were in
the hall, Duf-thac made a plan that the thralls should slay the ox,
and say that a bear of the wood had slain it, and then that they should
fall upon Heor-leif and his men as they were seeking the bear. And
they did so, and told their tale to Heor-leif. And as they went forth
to seek the bear, and were scattered through the shaw, the thralls
slew every one his man, and murdered them every one. Then they ran
away with the women and the stock and the boat. The thralls went out
to the islands which they could see in the sea to the south-west,
and there they dwelt for some little while.

Weevil and Carle were the names of Ing-wolf's thralls: he sent them
west along the sea to seek his porch-pillars, but when they came to
Heor-leif's head, they found Heor-leif there dead. Then they went back
and told Ing-wolf these tidings, and he was very angry. And afterwards
Ing-wolf went west to Heor-leif's Head, and when he saw Heor-leif
dead, he said, 'It was a pitiful death for a brave man that thralls
should slay him, but I see how it goes with those who will never
perform sacrifice.' Ing-wolf had Heor-leif and his fellows buried,
and looked after their ship and share of the stock.

Then Ing-wolf went up to the headland and saw islands lying in the
sea to the south-west. It came into his mind that the thralls must
have run away thither, for the boat had disappeared. So he and his
men went to seek the thralls, and found them there at a place called
Eith [the Tarbet] in the islands. They were sitting at their meat
when Ing-wolf fell upon them. They became fearful [panic-stricken],
and every man of them ran off his own way. Ing-wolf slew them all. The
place is called Duf-thac's Scaur, where he lost his life. Many of them
leaped over the rock, which was afterwards called by their name. The
islands were afterwards called the West-men isles whereon they were
slain, for they were West-men [Irishmen]. Ing-wolf and his men kept
with them the wives of them that had been murdered, and they brought
them back to Heor-leif's head. Ing-wolf was there another winter.

But in the summer after he went westward along the sea. He was the
third winter under Ing-wolf's fell, west of Aulfus-mere. This season
Weevil and Carle found his porch-pillars over against Erne's knoll
down below [west off] the Heath.

8. In the spring Ing-wolf went down over the Heath. He made for
himself a homestead at the place where his porch-pillars had come to
land. He dwelt in Reek-wick, and the porch-pillars are still there
in the parlour [lit. fire-house].

And Ing-wolf took land in settlement between Aulfus-mere and
Whale-frith, west of Brynie-dale, between it and Ax-water, and all
the ness to the west. Then said Carle, 'We went round or past good
lands in an ill hour, if we must dwell in this nook of a ness.' He
ran away and a bondmaid with him.

Ing-wolf gave Weevil his freedom, and he dwelt at Weevil's
stead. Weevil's-fell is called after him. He lived a long time,
and was a man very well thought of.

Ing-wolf had a hall built on Scal-fell or Hall-fell, and from thence
he saw a smoke by Aulfus-mere, and there he found Carle.

9. Ing-wolf was the most famous of all the Settlers, for he came here
to a desolate land, and was the first to settle the country. And the
other Settlers did after his example.

10. He had to wife Hall-weig, Frodi's daughter, the sister of Lopt
the Old. Their son was Thor-stan, who let set the Moot at Keel-ness,
before the All-Moot was established. His son was Thor-kell Moon, the
Law-speaker, who was of the best conversation of any heathen men in
Iceland, of those whom men have records of. He had himself carried
out into the rays of the sun in his death-sickness, and commended
himself to that God which had made the sun. Moreover he had lived as
cleanly as those Christian men who were of the best conversation or
way of life. His son was Thor-mod, and he was the gode or priest of
the whole congregation when Christendom came to Iceland. His son was
Hamall, father of Mar, Thor-mod and Torfe. Sigrod, a son of Mar, was
the father of Hamall, the father of Gud-mund, the father of Thor-mod,
the gode of Skeid.


4. 1. Beorn Buna was the name of a mighty and noble herse in Norway. He
was the son of Wether-grim, herse or lord of Sogn. Grim had to wife
Her-ware, daughter of Thor-gerde, daughter of Eylaug, the herse of Sogn
[MS. king]. Beorn had to wife We-laug, sister of We-mund the Old. They
had three sons. One of them was Cetil Flat-neb, the second Holgi,
the third Hrapp. They were noble men, and from them is the greatest
race that is told of in this book, and from them are come well-nigh
all the gentle-folk of Iceland.

2. Hrapp had to wife Thor-und, the Groenings-roepe. Their son was
Thord Sceg [Beard].  He had to wife Wil-borg, daughter of king Os-wald,
and Wolf-rune the Unborn, daughter of Ead-mund, king of the English.

3. Thord dwelt first at Lon in the east [Wash] ten or fifteen winters,
but when he heard of his porch-pillars at Lear-voe, then he sold his
land to Wolf-liot, who was the son of Thora, Haurda-Care's daughter;
and he [Thord] went west with all that he had, and took land in
settlement by the rede or under the council of Ing-wolf, between
Wolf-here-river and Lear-voe-water, and dwelt afterwards at Sceg-stead
or Beard-stead. His daughter was Helga, whom Cetil-Beorn the Old o'
Moss-fell had to wife. From Thord are come many gentle-folk in Iceland.

4. There was a man whose name was Hall, the son of Thori God-leas, the
son of Worm-here, the brother on the father's side of Hilda Worm-here's
daughter, whom Thor-beorn the Gaul-werish [man o' Gaula] had to wife,
but she was sister by her mother to Thord Beard. Hall and his father
would not offer sacrifices, but trusted in their own might. Hall went
to Iceland, and took land in settlement by Ing-wolf's rede, between
Mo-gils-water and Lear-voe-water, and dwelt at Mull. His son was Helgi,
who had to wife Thurid, Cetil-beorn's daughter. Their son was Thord o'
Alfsness, who had to wife Gud-ny, Raven-kell's daughter.

5. Harold Fair-hair harried west over the sea, as it is written in
the history of him. He laid under his rule all the Southreys [Sodor],
so far west that no king of Norway has ever owned land farther, save
king Magnus Barefoot. And when he came from the west, wickings did
haunt the islands [Western Islands, especially North British Islands],
Scots and Irish, and harried and robbed far and wide. But when king
Harold got news of this he sent Cetil Flat-neb, the son of Beorn Buna,
west to win back the islands.

Cetil had to wife Yngw-hild, daughter of Cetil o' Wether, herse in
Ring-ric. Their sons were these, Boern the Eastern and Helge Beolan;
Ead the deep o' Wealth and Thorund Hyrna were their daughters.

Cetil went west, but left his son Beorn behind him. He laid under him
all the Southreys, and made himself chief over them, but he paid no
gild or tax to king Harold as was intended. Then king Harold took as
his own all his lands in Norway, and drove his son Beorn abroad.


5. 1. Helge Beolan, the son of Cetil Flat-neb, went to Iceland from the
Southreys. He was with Ing-wolf the first winter, and took at his rede
all Keel-ness between Mo-gils-river and Midge-dale-water. He dwelt at
Temple. His sons were Battle-Hrapp and Ey-wind Shelty [Shetlander],
father of Col-swegen, father of Ey-wind, who had to wife Thor-laug,
Claeng's daughter. Their daughter was Thor-gerd, mother of Thora,
whom Thor-kell, the son of Osgar Cnaf, had to wife. Their son was
Ag-mund, father of bishop John the saint [of Holar].


6. 1. Aur-lyg was the name of a son of Hrapp, the son of Beorn Buna. He
was in fosterage with bishop Patrec, the saint in the Southreys. A
yearning came upon him to go to Iceland, and prayed bishop Patrec
that he would give him an outfit. The bishop gave him timber for
a church and asked him to take it with him, and a plenarium, and
an iron church-bell, and a gold penny, and consecrated earth to lay
under the corner-posts instead of hallowing the church, and prelates
to dedicate the church to Colum-cella [Columba o' the Cells].

Then spake bishop Patrec: 'Wheresoever thou turnest in to land, dwell
only there where three fells can be seen from the sea and a frith
running between each fell, and a dale in each fell. Thou shalt sail to
the furthest [southernmost]; there shall be a shaw there, and further
south under the fell thou shalt light on a clearing and three stones
raised or set up there. Do thou raise thy church and homestead there.'

2. Aur-lyg put to sea, and in a second ship with him a man named
Coll, his sworn brother. They kept company out. On board Aur-lyg's
ship was a man whose name was Thor-beorn Sparrow; another called
Thor-beorn Talcni; the third, Thor-beorn Scuma. They were the sons
of Bead-were Bladder-pate. But when they came where they might look
out for the land, there arose a great storm against them, and drove
them west about Iceland. Then Aur-lyg called upon bishop Patrec,
his foster-father, to bring them ashore, and [vowed] that he would
give the place a name after his name wherever he should first come
ashore. And after that they were but a little while ere they got to
land; and he brought his ship in to Aurlyg's haven, and called the
frith Patrec's frith therefore. But as for Coll he called upon Thor
or Thunder. They were parted in the storm, and he reached the place
called Colls-wick, and there his ship was wrecked. His crew got to
land some of them, and shall be told after.

3. And in the spring Aur-lyg fitted out his ship, and sailed away
with all that he had; and when he came south off Faxes-mouth, he saw
the fells that had been spoken of to him, and knew them. And then the
iron bell fell overboard and sunk in the sea. But they sailed in along
the frith, and went in to the land at the place that is now called
Sand-wick on Keel-ness, and there lay the iron bell in the sea-weed.

4. Aur-lyg took up his abode at Esia-rock [Clay-rock], by the rede
of Helge Beolan his kinsman, and took land in settlement between
Mo-gils-river and Os-wif's becks. He built a church at Esia-rock,
as was commanded him.

Help was the name of his wife. Their son was Wal-theow, who came
to Iceland a full-grown man with Aur-lyg. Afterward Aur-lyg had to
wife Is-gerd, daughter of Diarmaid Bresesson. Their son was Gar-mund,
father of Hall-dora, whom Theost-wolf, the son of Beorn Gold-bearer,
had to wife. Their son was Thor-laf, who dwelt at Esia-rock after
Gar-mund, his mother's father. They put their trust in Colum-cille,
though they were unbaptized. Thor-laf was possessed by a troll,
yet he took Christendom; from him are many men come. * From him are
the Esbergings come. The daughter of Aur-lyg the Old and Is-gerd
was We-laug, whom Gund-laug Worm's-tongue the Elder had to wife,
and their daughter was Thurid Dylla, the mother of Illugi the Black.

5. There was a man named Swart-cell [Cathal Dubh]. He went
from Caithness to Iceland, and took land in settlement inside
Midge-dale-water, and between it and Eilif's-dale-water, and dwelt
at Kid-fell first, and afterwards at Eyre. His son was Thor-kell,
father of Glum, the man that took Christendom when he was already
old. He was wont thus to pray before the cross: 'Good be with the
old ever! Good be with the young ever!' His son was Thorarin, the
father of Glum o' Waterlease. Arn-leif or Erne-laf was the name of
Swart-cell's sister, whom Thor-wolf Wili-gisl, the father of Clamp-iron
the Old of Floce's-dale, had to wife. Their daughter was Hall-gerd,
whom Berg-thor, Coll's son, had to wife.

6. Wal-theow, who was spoken of before, the son of Aurlyg o' Esia-rock;
he took in settlement all Ceos, and dwelt at Middle-fell. Thor-beorn
Coll was the name of his son, the father of Hall-weig, whom Thord
lamb had to wife. That is the kin of the Waltheowings. Sig-ny
was the name of a daughter of Wal-theow, after whom Signy-stead
is called. Grim-kell, the son of Beorn Gold-bearer, had her to
wife. Their sons were these: Haurd, who was slain in Gar's-holm, and
Gnup [Crag], the father of Birning, the father of Gnup, the father of
Eiric the Greenlandmen's bishop. Wal-brand was the name of another
son of Wal-theow, [he was] the father of Torfe, who first dwelt in
Madder-field. He and his father made a fellowship with Ord o' Tongue,
according to which they dwelt afterwards at Broad-bowster in Northern
Reek-dale. Torfe was the father of Thorkel-o'-Scaney, who had to wife
Arn-gerd, daughter of Thor-kell, son of Cathal Dubh.

7. Thore o' Hwam took land in settlement between Lax-water and
Force-water, and dwelt at Hwam. He had a feud with Ref [Fox] the Old
about a cow, was called Byrnie, after whom Byrnie-dale is called. This
heifer Thore had long lost, and she was found in Byrnie-dale on land
which Ref owned, and forty head of neat with her, which were all
come from her, and they had gone about out of doors finding their
own fodder. Each of them claimed the cattle, but Thore fell before
Ref and with him eight men, when they fought by the hillocks which
were afterwards called Thore's hillocks.

8. Thor-wolf Butter, who was spoken of before, was the son of Thor-stan
Scrofa, the son of Grim, to whom sacrifices were made after he was dead
on account of the love men bore him, and he was called Camban.  The son
of Thor-wolf Butter was Sol-mund, father of Thor-stan, who took land
in settlement in Byrnie-dale, between Blue-shaw-water and Force-water.
He had to wife Thor-berg Catla, daughter of Helge Scarf, the son of
God-laf, who took in settlement Bard-strand. Their son was Ref o'
Byrnie-dale, the father of Hall-dora, whom Sigfus Ellida-Grimsson
had to wife. Their daughter was Thor-gerd, mother of Sigfus, father
of priest Saemund the Wise.

Now are told up those men who settled in the settlement of Ing-wolf
westward from him.


7. 1. There was a man whose name was Aawang, an Irishman, the first
man that dwelt at Bottom, and he dwelt there all his life. There was
then so great a shaw there that he built a ship out of it, and loaded
her at a place that is now called Lathe-hammer or Loading-rock. His
son was Thor-laf, the father of Thurid, whom Thor-mod, Thiost-here's
son o' Elfetsness, and Id-wen Mold-Gnup's daughter, had to wife. Their
son was Borc, the father of Thord, the father of Eadwin o' Road-holt.

2. Thor-mod [pr. Diarmaid] the Old and Cetil [pr. Cathal], Brese's son,
went from Ireland to Iceland and took in settlement all Acre-ness
between Trout-water and Colman's river. They were Irish. Colman
was also Irish, after whom the river is named, and he dwelt first at
Caith-ness [in Iceland]. These brethren exchanged land with each other,
so that Diarmaid owned [all] south of Rowan and up to Colman's river,
and dwelt at the inner Holm. But Cathal, his brother, owned [all]
from the west of Rowan, and north of Acre-fell to Trout-water. His son
was named Berse [i.e. Brese], the father of Thor-gest, the father of
Starre o' Holm, the father of Cnatt, the father of Asdis, whom Claeng,
Snae-beorn's son, the [father] of Haven-worm, had to wife. Gar-laug
was the daughter of Thor-mod the Old [and] the mother of Ord o' Tongue.

3. Eor-wend the Christian was the son of Cathal, Brese's son. He
dwelt at Eor-wends-holt, which is now called Garth. He kept well to
Christendom to the day of his death, and was a hermit or solitary
in his old age. The son of Eorwend was Clepp or Clemp, the father
of Einar, the father of Narfe. Ha-were was the name of another son
of Clepp; [he was] the father of Thor-gar. Ethna, or Aithne, was the
name of the daughter of Cathal, Brese's son. She was given in marriage
in Ireland to a man named Conall. Their son was As-wolf Al-scic, who
at that time went from Ireland to Iceland, and came to land in the
East-friths to Oyce. [He was a kinsman of Eor-wend of Garth, and was
a Christian man, and would not have anything to do with heathen men,
and would not receive meat of them.]

4. They went twelve together from the East until they came to the
house of Thor-gar the Haurd at Holt under Eyfell, and there they
pitched their tent, but three of his fellows fell sick and died there;
but priest John Thorgarsson, the father of Grim of Holt, found their
bones and translated them to the church. Afterwards As-wolf made him a
hall near to where the tower of the church now is at As-wolf's-hall, by
the counsel of Thor-gar. For Thor-gar would not have them in his house.

A river ran by the very hall of As-wolf. It was about the beginning of
the winter; the river was then full of fish. Thor-gar said that they
were fishing in his fishery. Then As-wolf went away and made another
hall to the west by another river, which was called the Irishman's
River, for they were Irish. But when men came to the river it was
full of fish, so that men thought such a wonder had never been seen,
but all those that were in the eastern river were gone. Then the men of
that part drove them away thence, and As-wolf went to the western hall
[the most westerly of the three of As-wolf's halls]. And then all went
the same way; the franklins accused them of magic, but Thor-gar said
that he thought they must be good men. In the spring As-wolf and his
men went away west to Acre-ness, and he set up housekeeping in Holm
at Kirk-bowster.

5. His son was Solve, the father of Thor-hilda, whom Brand, the son
of Thor-grim, Ceallac's son, had to wife. Their son was Thor-laf,
father of Bard, father of Io-frid, whom Arne, Torwe's son, had to
wife. Their daughter was Helga, whom Arn-grim Godmundsson had to wife.

6. But when As-wolf began to grow old he became a solitary or
hermit. His cell was where the church now stands, and there he died,
and was buried there at Holm. But when Hall-dor, the son of Illugi the
Red, dwelt there, one of the cow-girls was wont to wipe her feet on
the hummock that was over As-wolf's tomb. She dreamed that As-wolf
warned her not to wipe her dirty feet in his house. 'Nevertheless
we will be good friends [lit. reconciled] if thou will tell Hall-dor
thy dream.' She told it him, but he said that it was no matter what
women dreamed, and paid no heed to it. But when bishop Rod-wolf went
abroad from By, where he had dwelt 19 winters in the life of a monk,
there were three monks left behind him. One of them dreamed that
As-wolf had said to him, 'Do thou send thy housecarl to Hall-dor at
Holm, and buy of him the hummock that is at the cowbyre-path, and
give him a mark of silver for it.' The monk did so. The housecarl
bought the hummock and then dug in the earth there, and found a
man's bones. He took them up and carried them home with him. But the
next night after Hall-dor dreamed that As-wolf came to him and told
him, that he would make both his eyes leap out of his head unless
he bought his bones at the same price that he sold the hummock. So
Hall-dor bought As-wolf's bones, and had a shrine of wood made, and
set it over the altar. Hall-dor sent his son Illugi abroad to get
timber for a church, but as he was coming back, when he got between
Reek-ness and Snowfell's-ness, he was not able, by reason of the mates,
to land where he wished. So he cast overboard all the church timber,
and bade it go where As-wolf wished; but the East-men brought their
vessel up at Waddle. But three nights later the timber came ashore
on Kirk-sand at Holm, save two trunks that came ashore at Rauf-ness
in the Mire or Fen. Hall-dor had a church built [blank] 30 ells long,
and thatched with wood, and hallowed it to Colum-cilla and God.

7. Col-grim the Old, [son] of Hrod-wulf, the herse or lord,
and of Unna, daughter of Hacon, the son of Earl Grit-garth,
after whom Grit-garth's howe, south of Agda-ness, is called,
went out of Throwendham to Iceland, and took in settlement Nether
Whale-frith-strand from Blue-shaw-water to Lax-water, and out to the
brook that falls out from Sourby, and dwelt at Four-horn. His son
was Thor-hall, the father of Col-grim, the father of [blank]-stan,
the father of Cwist, the father of Cale. Berg-thora was a daughter
of Col-grim, whom Ref o' Brynie-dale had to wife.

8. Finn the Wealthy, the son of Hall-dor, Hægene's son, came out
of Stafanger to Iceland. He had to wife Thor-ware, daughter of
Thor-beorn of Mosfell, the son of Hrad [MS. Brand]. He took land in
settlement from the south of Lax-water to Calman's river. He dwelt at
Midfell. His son was Thor-gar, the father of Holm-stan, the father
of Thor-und .... Sceg or Beardie o' Shaw was the son of Thor-un,
and the father of Styrmi and of Bolle o' Shaw.

9. There was a man named Becan [little] that took land in settlement
inward from Borg-dale-water to Trout-water, and dwelt at Becan-stead
in the settlement of Cetil.

10. Hall-kell, that took in settlement White-river-side, dwelt first
in Acre-ness at Hall-kell-stead, before the sons of Brese drove him
abroad, and when he went after his cattle, that were out of doors
finding their own fodder, he was slain, and he is 'howed,' or laid
in the barrow there.

11. Haven-worm came out of Stafanger to Iceland, and took in settlement
all the land round Mell-wharf west to Trout-water and Lax-water and
east to Duck-kyle-water, and dwelt at Haven. His son was Thor-gar
Hewn-cheek, the father of Thor-unn, the mother of Thor-unn, the mother
of Iostan, the father of Sigurd, the father of Beorn-hedin. Thor-gar
Hewn-cheek was a henchman of king Hacon, Ethelstan's foster-son. 'At
Fitia he won his wound and a good renown.'

12. Two brethren dwelt in the settlement of Finn and Worm, Hrodgar
the Sage in Sowerby, and Ord-gar at Lear-water; but Finn and Worm
brought them out, for they thought they were crowded there. The
brethren afterwards took in settlement Floe in Rawn-gerding-Rape,
and Thor-gar dwelt in Rawn-garth, and Ord-gar at Ord-gar's-hill. He
had to wife a daughter of Cathal-gowe.

13. Haven-worm is howed there on the headland in front of the homestead
in Haven, where he first came to land.


[The text taken from Sturla's-book.]

8. 1. There was a man named Wolf, the son of Brund-Belfe and of
Hall-bera, daughter of Wolf, the lion of Raven-ist. Wolf had to
wife Sal-borg, daughter of Berdla-care. He was called Qweld-wolf
[Evening-wolf]. Thor-wolf and Scalla-grim were their sons. King
Harold Fairhair had Thor-wolf slain north in Alost on Sand-ness,
through a false charge made by the sons of Hild-rid. King Harold
would not pay weregild for him. Then Grim and Qweld-wolf fitted out
a merchant ship, having a mind to go to Iceland, for they had heard
news thereof from Ing-wolf their friend. They lay ready for sea in
Solund, and there they took the cog which king Harold had had taken
from Thor-wolf when his men were just come from England, and they
slew there Hall-ward Hard-farer and Sig-tryg Fast-farer, who were
in command of her. They also slew the son of Guth-thorm, the son of
Sigrod Hart, the first cousin of the king, and all the ship's crew
save two men, whom they sent to tell the king the tidings. Each of
them made his ship ready to go to Iceland, and thirty men aboard of
each. Qweld-wolf commanded the one which they had taken there.

Grim, the Haleygoman, the son of Thori, the son of Gund-laug, the son
of Hrod-wolf, the son of Cetil Keel-farer, was captain with Qweld-wolf
of the ship that he commanded. They kept within ken of each other at
sea, but when they had gone over a great space of sea, Qweld-wolf fell
ill, and he ordered that they should make a coffin for his body if
he should die, and bade them tell his son Grim that he should set up
his homestead in Iceland a little way from the place where his coffin
should come to land, if it was so fated. After that Qweld-wolf died,
and his coffin was cast overboard. Grim and his men sailed to the south
of the land, for they had heard that Ing-wolf dwelt in the south of
the land. They sailed westward past Reek-ness, and stood in up the
frith. Then they parted company, so that neither was within ken of
the other. Grim the Haleygoman and his fellows sailed right up the
frith till they had cleared all the reefs, and then cast anchor. But
when the flood served they moved up into a river-mouth, and there
berthed their ship as far as they could float her. This river is now
called Gowe-water. Then they brought their goods ashore. But when they
explored the land, they had gone but a short way west from the ship
ere they found Qweld-wolf's coffin drifted into a bay. They carried
it up to the ness that was there, and heaped a pile of stones over it.

Scald-Grim came ashore at the place that is now called Cog-ness
in the Mire or Fen. Afterwards he explored the land, and there was
a great fen-land and broad shaws, far between fell and foreshore,
and when they journeyed inward along the frith they came on a ness
where they found wild swans, wherefore they called it Elfets-ness
[Wild-swan's-ness]. They did not stop till they met Grim the
Haleygoman. They told Grim all about their journey, and also what
message Qweld-wolf had given to his son. Scald-Grim went to see where
the coffin had come ashore, and he made up his mind that there was a
likely place for a homestead a little way therefrom. He stayed there
through the winter he came over sea, and explored all the country.

He took in settlement the land outward from Seal-wash and up to
Borg-raun and all south to Haven-fell, the whole country side as
far as the rivers run to the sea. He reared him a homestead beside
the bay where Qweld-wolf's coffin came to land and called it Borg,
moreover he called the frith Borg-frith.

Then he shared out the country to his fellows, and many men took land
in settlement there at his rede.

2. Scald-Grim gave land to Grim the Haleygoman on the south of
the frith, between Duck-kyle's-water and Grim's-river. He dwelt at
Whan-eyre [Angelica-eyre].  The name of his son was Wolf, the father
of Hrodulf o' Goat-land.

3. Thor-beorn the Swarthy was the name of a man who bought land
of Haven-worm inside of Seal-eyre and up to Force-water. He dwelt
at Sheel-brink. His son was Thor-ward, who had to wife Thor-unn,
the daughter of Thor-beorn o' Erne-holt. Their sons were these:
Thor-arin the Blind and Thor-gils, Orri's poet, who was with Anlaf
Cuaran in Dyflin [Dublin].

4. Scorre, a freedman of Cathal-gowe, took in settlement Scorres-dale
above the river, and was slain there.


9. 1. Beorn Gold-bearer took in settlement South Reek-dale, and dwelt
at Gold-bearer-stead. His son was Grim-kell, gode at Blue-Shaw. He had
to wife Sig-ny, daughter of Wal-brand Wall-theowsson. Their son was
Haurd, who was the leader of the Men o' Holm. Beorn Gold-bearer had to
wife Leot-unn, sister of Col-grim the Old. Swart-head [Ceann-dubh] of
Reyd-fell was another of their sons. He had to wife Thurid, daughter
of Ord o' Tongue. Their daughter [was] Thor-dis, whom Gud-laugh
the Wealthy had to wife. Theost-wolf was the third son of Beorn;
the fourth was Gar-mund.

2. Thorgar Mel-dun [Mael-duine] received all his land from Beorn
down from Grim's-river. He dwelt at Tongue-fell. He had to wife
Gar-borg, daughter of Balcan or Balce of Ram-fell. Their son [was]
We-laf the Old.

3. Floce, a thrall of Cetil Gowe, took Floce-dale and was slain there.

4. Auleif Shelty was the name of a gentle-born man that came in his
ship to Borg-frith, and was the first winter with Scald-Grim. He
took land in settlement by rede of Scald-Grim, between Grim's-river
and Gar's-river, and dwelt at Warm-beck. His sons were these: Ragi
of Bath-dale and Thorarin the Law-speaker, who had to wife Thordis,
daughter of Anlaf Feilan. Their daughter [was] Wig-dis, whom Stan
Thor-finsson had to wife. The son of Ragi was Guth-thorm, father of
Gund-ware, mother of Thor-ny, mother of Thor-lac, father of Run-wolf,
father of bishop Thor-lac.

5. Cetil Blund [Cathal?] and Gar his son came to Iceland, and were
with Scald-Grim the first winter. Then Gar took to wife Thor-unn,
Scald-Grim's daughter. In the spring after Grim showed them land, and
they took in settlement up from Floce-dale-river to Reek-dale-water,
and the tongue right up to Red-gill, and all Floce-dale down from the
Brinks. Cetil dwelt at Throwend-holt. Blunds-mere is called after him,
and there he dwelt afterwards.

6. Gar the Wealthy, his son, dwelt at Gars-lithe, and he had another
house at Upper Reeks. His sons were these: Thor-gar Blund and
Blund-Cetil and Cathal-dubh o' Eyre; Gar's daughter was Berg-dis,
whom Gnup Flocesson of Bush had to wife. Of their kin was Thor-ord
Bush-Blund.


10. 1. An-wend Broad-beard was the son of Wolf-here, the son of Wolf
Fitia-beardie, the son of Thori-hlammandi [thumper]. An-wend took
in settlement all Tongue between White-water and Reek-dale-water,
and dwelt at Broad-bowster. He had to wife Gar-laug, daughter of
Diarmaid of Acre-ness, the sister of Bersi [Bresi]. Their son was
Ord o' Tongue, but Thor-orda was the name of their daughter. Torfi
the son of Wal-brand, the son of Wal-theow, the son of Aurlyg of
Esia-rock, took her to wife, and there went hence with her [as a
marriage portion] half Broad-bowster and Neck-land also. He gave his
sister Signy Signy-stead, and there he dwelt.

2. Torfi slew the Men o' Cropp, twelve together; and he was the chief
leader at the slaying of the Men o' Holm, and he was at Cave-fitia with
Illugi the Swarthy and Sturla Gode when there were slain there eighteen
of the Cave Men, but they burnt Eadwin Smith-cell's [Cathal Gobha?] son
in the house at Thor-ward-stead. Torfi's son was Thor-kell of Scaney.

3. Ord o' Tongue had to wife Thor-unn, Helgi's daughter. Their
children were these: Thor-wald, who was the leader at the burning
of Blund-Cetil, and Thor-ord, who had to wife Io-frid, Gunhere's
daughter. Their daughter [was] Hungerd, whom Swarting Hafr-beornsson
had to wife. The daughters of Ord o' Tongue were Thor-id, whom
Swart-head [Cenn-dubh] had to wife, and Io-frid, whom Thor-fin
Seal-Thorisson had to wife, and Hall-gerd, whom Hall-bern, the son
of Ord o' Kid-rock, had to wife.

4. Ceol-ware was the mother's sister of Ord o' Tongue, who dwelt in
Ceol-ware-stead, the mother of Thor-laf, the mother of Thor-rid, the
mother of Gund-hild, whom Cale had to wife, and of Glum, the father
of Thor-arin, the father of Glum of Water-lease.

[M: Double text to ch. 10. 1.] Crum-Ord was the name of a nobleman
that took in settlement North Reek-dale and all the tongue between
Reek-dale-water and White-water and up to the Parting-gill. His son was
Ean-wend, who had to wife Thor-laug, Thor-mod's daughter. Their son was
Ord o' Tongue, who dwelt at Broad-bowster. [Here ends the double text.]


[Now Hawk's-book again.]

5. Red was the name of a man that took land in settlement up from
Red-gill to Gills, and dwelt at Red-gill. His sons were these: Wolf
of Wolf-stead and Ead of Ead-stead, on the north of the river, whom
Haurd slew in fight, and therefrom beginneth the History of Haurd
Grim-kellsson and Gar.

6. Grim was the name of a man that took land in settlement southerly
up from Gills to Grims-gill, and dwelt at Grims-gill. His sons
were these: Thor-gils Eye of Eye-stead, and Ranig at Ranig-stead,
the father of Grim, that was called Stem-Grim or Bows-Grim. He dwelt
at Stem-Grim-stead, which is now called Sigmund-stead. Over against,
north of White-water beside the river itself, is his howe, where he
was slain.

7. Thor-kell Corna-mule took in settlement the South Oyce from
Colls-beck to Parting-gill, and dwelt at Oyce. His son was Thor-berg
Corna-mule, who had to wife An-lof Ellidis-shield, the daughter of
Unfey and Ans-gerd, sister of Thorgar Goldin or Goldne [i. e. the
One-eyed]. Their children were these: Ey-stan and Haf-thora, whom Aed
Sceg-son had to wife, who afterwards dwelt at Oyce, where Mid-frith
Sceg died, and there his howe is down below the garth. Another of
Sceg's sons was Coll, who dwelt at Colls-beck.

Aed's sons were Ey-stan and Illugi.


11. 1. Wolf, the son of Grim the Haleygoman, and of Swan-laug,
daughter of Diarmaid of Acre-ness, and sister of Bresi. This Wolf
took land in settlement between White-water and South-Iockle, and
dwelt in Goat-land. His sons were these: Rod-wolf the Wealthy, the
father of Hall-dora, whom Gizor the White had to wife. Their daughter
[was] Wil-borg, whom Shelty Scegsson had to wife.

2. Another son of his was Hrod-wald, father of Hrod-wolf the Younger,
who had to wife Thur-id, daughter of Wal-theow, the son of Aurlyg the
Old. Their children were these: Ceallac of Lund in Suther-dale, the
father of Magnus, the father of Coll, the father of Berg-thor. Another
was Solwi o' Goat-land, the father of Thord of Reek-holt.

3. The third son of Hrod-wolf was Illugi the Red, who first dwelt at
Rawn's-oyce. He had to wife then Sigrid, daughter of Thorarin the
Wicked, and sister of Mouse-Bale-werk. Illugi gave Bale-werk this
homestead, and went to dwell at Temple-stead in Reek-dale, for all
the Goatlandmen had to maintain half the temple, and Ord o' Tongue
the other half. And lastly, he dwelt at Inner Holm on Acre-ness;
for he changed lands and wives and all their stock with Holm-Starri;
then Illugi took to wife Thorund, daughter of Thor-mod, Thiost-here's
son of Elfet's-ness, but Sigrid hanged herself in the temple because
she would not change husbands.

4. Hrod-wolf the Younger gave Thor-laug the priestess, his daughter,
to Ord, Yri's son, wherefore he went west to Ballar-water and dwelt
there long, and was called Hrod-wolf of Ballar-water.













LIB. II.

[[64, 65: ii. 1.]] Her hefr upp landnaóm í Vestfirðinga-fiórðunge,
es mart stór-menne hefer bygðan [94].


1. 1. Maðr hét Calman Suðreyskr [95]; hann fór til Íslannz, ok kom
í Hvalfiaorð, ok sat við Calmans-aó um vetrenn. Þar drucknoðo syner
hans tveir á Hvalfirðe: en síðan nam hann5 land fyr vestan Hvít-ao,
miðle ok Flióta, Calmans-tungo alla, ok svá allt austr under iaokla sem
graos ero vaxen, ok bió í Calmans-tungo. Hann drucknaðe í Hvít-aó, es
hann hafðe faret suðr í Hraun, at hitta friðlo [96] sína: ok es haugr
hans á Hvítár-bakka fyr sunnan. Hans son vas Sturla Goðe, es fyrst bió
á Sturlo-staoðom10 upp under Tungo-felle upp frá Skald-skelmis-dale;
en síðan bió hann í Calmans-tungo. Hans son vas Biarne, es deilðe
við Hrólf enn Yngra ok sono hans um Tungo'na-Lítlo. Þá hét Biarne at
taka Cristne. Efter þat braut Hvít-aó út far-veg þann es nú fellr
hon. Þá eignaðesk Biarne Tungo'na-Lítlo ofan um Grindr ok [97]15
Solmundar-haofða.

2. Cylan hét bróðer Calmans; hann bió fyr neðan Collz hamar: hans son
vas Care es deilðe við Karla Conals son á Karla-staoðom, leysingja
Hrólfs or Geitlande, um oxa; ok reyndesk svá, at Karle átte. Síðan
eggiaðe Care þræl sínn til at drepa20 Karla. Þrællenn lét sem hann oerr
være, ok hlióp suðr um hraun. [[66: ii. 1.]] Karle sat á þreskilde,
þrællenn hió hann bana-hoegg. Síðan drap Cáre þrælenn. Þióðolfr,
son Karla, drap Cylan Cára son í Cylans-holme. Síðan brende Þióðolfr
Cara inne, þar sem nú heiter á Brenno. Biarne Sturlo son tók skírn
ok bió á Biarna-staoðom í Tungo'nne-Lítlo, ok lét þar goera kirkjo.5


2. 1. Þróndr Nefja hét maðr ágætr, faðer Þórsteins, es átte Lofthoeno,
dóttor Arenbiarnar hersess or Fiaorðom. Syster Loft-hoeno vas Arnþrúðr,
es átte Þórer herser Hroallz son; ok var þeirra son Arinbiaorn
herser. Móðer þeirra Arnþrúðar vas Ástríðr Sloeki-drengr, dótter
Braga skáldz ok Lofthoeno, dóttor10 Erps Lútanda. Son Þorsteins ok
Lofthoeno vas Hrosskell, es átte Ióreiðe, Olves dóttor, Finna sonar,
Mottuls sonar [98] konungs; Hall­kell hét son þeirra.

Hrosskell fór til Íslannz ok kom í Grunna-fiaorð, ok bió fyrst á
Akra-nese. Þá aomoðosk þeir Cetill broedr við hann. Síðan nam15 hann
Hvítár-síðo, miðle Kiarr-ár ok Flióta. Hann bió á Hallkels-staoðom
[99], ok Hallkell son hans efter hann; ok átte Þórríðe Dyllo, dóttor
Gunnlaugs or Þverár-hlíð ok Vélaugar OErlygs dóttor frá Esjoberge.

 [100]Baorn þeirra Hallkels ok Þórríðar, vóro þau Þórarenn, ok
 Finn­varðr,20 Tindr, ok Illoge enn Svarte, ok Gríma es átte Þorgils
 Ara [[67: ii. 2.]] son: Þóraren vá Músa-Bolverkr [101], es hann bió í
 Hrauns-áse. Þá lét hann goera þar virke, ok veitte Hvít-aó í goegnom
 ásenn; en áðr fell hon um Melrakka-dal ofan: Illoge ok Tindr sótto
 Baolverk í virket.

2. Hrosskell gaf land Þórvarðe, faoðor Smiðcels, faoðor þeirra5
Þórarens, ok Auðunnar, es reð fyrer Helles-maonnom. Hann bió á
Þorvarðz-staoðom, ok átte Fliótzdal allan upp frá [102] Fliótom.

3. Hrosskell gaf Þórgaute skipverja sínom land niðr í Síðo. Hann bió
á Þorgautz-staoðom: hans syner vóro þeir Gíslar tveir.

4. Ásbiaorn enn Auðge, Harðar son, keypte land fyr sunnan10 Kiarr-aó
upp í [103] Sleggjo-loek til Hnit-biarga. Hann bió á Ásbiarnar-staoðom:
hann átte Þórbiaorgo, dóttor Miðfiarðar-Skeggja; þeirra dótter vas
Ingibiaorg er átte Illoge enn Svarte.

5. Ornolfr, es nam Ornolfs-dal ok Kiarra-dal fyr norðan upp til
Hnitbiarga [104]: Cetill Blundr keyfte land at Ornolfe allt fyr
norðan15 Klif, ok bió í Ornolfs-dale. Ornolfr goerðe þá bú upp
í Kiarra-dal--þar heita nú Ornolfs-staðer. Fyr ofan Klif heiter
Kiarra-dalr; þvi at þar vóro hrís-kioerr ok smá-skógar miðle Kiarr-ár
ok [105] Þver-ár, svá at þar mátte eige byggja: Blund-Cetill vas maðr
stór-auðigr; hann lét ryðja víða í skógom ok byggja þar.20

[M: Aurnolfr hét maðr es nam Norð-tungo alla á miðle Kiarr-ár [[68:
ii. 2.]] ok Þver-ár, ok bió í Ornolfsdal. Hans son vas Blunn-Ketill,
faðer Þorkels, es Hoensa-Þórer brende inne. Þaðan af goerðesk deilð
þeirra Þórðar Gelliss ok Tungo-Oddz.]


3. 1. Hrómundr hét maðr, bróðer Gríms ens Háleyska [106]. Hann kom
skipe síno í Hvít-aó; hann nam Þverár-dal,5 ok Þverár-hlíð ofan til
Hallar-múla, ok framm til Þver-ár. Hann bió á Hrómundar-staoðom--þar
es nú kallat at Calls-brecko. Hans son vas Gunnlaugr Orms-tunga,
es bió á Gunnlaugs-staoðom fyr sunnan Þver-aó; hann átte Vélaugo,
sem fyrr es ritit [107].

2. Haogni hét skipvere Hrómundar; hann bió á Haogna-staoðom.10
Hans son var Helge at Helga-vatne, faðer Arngríms Goða, es vas at
Blund-Cetils-brenno: Haogne vas bróðer Finnz ens Auðga.

3. Ísleifr ok Isroeðr [108] broeðr, naómo laond ofan frá
Sleggjo-loek, miðle Ornolfs-dals ár ok Hvít-ár, et oefra [109] ofan
til Rauða-loekjar; en et syðra ofan til Hoerða-hóla [110]: Isleifr bió
á Ísleifs-staoðom, en Ísroeðr15 á Ísroeðar-staoðom, ok átte land et
syðra með Hvít-aó. Hann vas faðer Þórbiarnar, faoðor Liótz á Veggjom,
es fell í Heiðar-víge.

4. Ásgeirr hét skipvere Hrómundar, es bió á Hamri upp frá
Helga-vatne. Hann átte Hilde Stiornu, dóttor Þórvallz Þorgríms sonar
Brækiss [111]: þeirra syner vóro þeir Steinbiaorn enn Sterke, ok20
[[69, 70: ii. 3.]] enn stór-hoegge [112]; ok Þórvarðr, faðer Mæfo,
es Hrifla [113] átte; ok Þórsteinn enn þriðe; fiórðe Helge, faðer
Þórðar, faoðor Scald-Helga.

5. Arnbiaorg hét kona; hon bió at Arnbiargar-loek: hennar syner
vóro þeir Elldgrímr, es bió á halsin upp frá Arnbiargar-loek,5 á
Elldgríms-staoðom; ok Þórgestr, es feck bana-sár þá es þeir Hrane
baorðosk, þar sem nú heiter Hrana-fall.

6. Þórunn bió í Þórunnar-hollte. Hon átte land ofan til Víðe-loekjar,
ok upp til mótz við Þórríðe Spá-kono systor sína, es bió í Graof--Við
hána es kendr Þórunnar-hyr í Þver-aó. Ok frá henne10 ero Hamar-byggjar
(komner).

7. Þorbiaorn, son Arnbiarnar, Óleifs sonar [114] Langhals. Hann vas
bróðer Lýtings í Vápna-firðe: Þorbiaorn nam Stafa-holltz-tungo miðle
Norðr-ár ok Þver-ár.  Hann bió í Arnar-hollte: hans son vas Teitr í
Stafa-holte, faðer Einars, ok Þorvallz, faoðor15 Þórkaotlo, es átte
Hyrningr Cleppiarns son [115].

8. Þorbiaorn Blese nam land í Norðrár-dale fyr sunnan upp frá Króke;
ok Hellis-dal allan, ok bió á Blesa-staoðom. Hans son var Gísli at
Melom í Hellis-dale--Við hann es kennt Gísla-vatn [116]. Annarr son
Blesa vas Þórfinnr á Þórfinnz-staoðom, faðer Þórgerðar20 Heiðar-eckjo,
móðor Þórðar Erro, faoðor Þorgerðar, móðor Helga [117] at Lunde.


[[70: ii. 3.]]

9. Geirmundr, son Gunnbiarnar Gandz, nam Tungona á miðle Norðr-ár
ok Sand-ár, ok bió í Tungo: hans son vas Brúne, faðer Þórbiarnar at
Steinom es fell í Heiðar-víge.

10. Orn enn Gamle nam Sann-dal [118] ok Mióva-dal, ok svá Norðrár-dal
ofan frá Króke til Arnar-boeless, ok bió á Háreks-staoðom.5

11. Rauða-Biaorn nam Biarnar-dal, ok þá dala es þar ganga af; ok átte
annat bú niðr frá Mælefellz-gile; en annat niðre í heraðe; sem ritið
[119] es.

[M*: Biorn hét maðr Norroenn, es kom út síð landnáma-tíðar,10 ok nam
Norðrár-dal fyr norðan Norðr-aó, ok Biarnar-dal allan; ok þá dala alla
es þar ganga af: hann bió at Dals-minne: hann blés fyrstr manna rauða
á Íslande; ok vas hann af því kallaðr Rauða-Biorn: hann átte, etc.]

12. Karl nam Karls-dal upp frá Hreðu-vatne [120]; ok bió under15
Karls-felle; ok átte land ofan til Iamna-skarðz til mótz við Grím.

[M* ('Landn.'):--


4. 1. Þórolfr hét maðr, er bió í Naumo-dale; hann vas Ulfs son,
es kallaðr vas Kvelld-Ulfr; Grímr hét20 annarr son Ulfs. Haraldr
konungr enn Hárfagre lét drepa Þórolf, ok goerði oengo bæta; en
þess hefnðe Grímr, ok fór síðan til [[71: ii. 4.]] Íslannz; en Ulfr
andaðez í hafeno. Skalla-Grímr kom skipe síno í Gufu-ár-ós, ok nam
land á miðle Norðr-ár ok Hitar-ár, allt á miðle fiallz ok fiaoro, ok
bió at Borg. Hann átti Bero Yngvars dóttor. Syner þeirra Skalla-Gríms
vóro þeir Þórolfr ok Egill; þeir aótto báðir Ásgerðe Biarnar dóttor;
ok vas dótter Þórolfs5 Þórdís, es átte Grímr at Mosfelle. Þórolfr
fell á Vinheiði í Englande í orrosto [121]; en Egill fór til Íslannz,
ok bió at Borg, ok hans kyns-menn langa tíma.]

2. Gríss ok Grímr héto leysingjar Skalla-Gríms; þeim gaf hann land
upp við fiaoll; Gríse Grísar-tungo, en Gríme Gríms-dal.10

3. Balke hét maðr, son Blæings Sóta sonar of Sóta-nese; hann barðesk
á móte Haralde konunge í Hafrs-firðe. Hann fór til Íslannz, ok nam
Hrúta-fiaorð allan, ok bió í Boe. Hans son vas Berse Goðlauss, es nam
Langa-vaz-dal ok bió á Torfhvala-staoðom. Hans syster vas Geirbiaorg es
átte Þorgeirr Meldunn í Tungo-felle;15 þeirra son Véleifr enn Gamle,
faðer Holmgaongo-Bersa. Bersa Goðlauss átte Þordíse, dóttor Þorhaddz
[122] or Hitár-dale, ok fylgðo henne heiman Holms-laond, ok bió
hann þar síðan. Þeirra son Arngeirr, es átte Þórríðe dóttor Þórfinnz
ens Stranga; þeirra [[72: ii. 4.]] son Biaorn Hitdoela-kappe. Móðer
Þórríðar vas Sæuðr, dótter Skalla-Gríms.

4. Sigmundr hét leysinge Skalla-Gríms; hónom gaf hann land miðle
Gliúfr-ár ok Norðr-ár. Hann bió á Haugom, áðr hann foerðe sik í
Munoðar-nes--Við hann es kennt Sigmundar-nes.5

5. Rauða-Biaorn keypte land at Skalla-Gríme miðle Gliúfr-ár ok
Guf-ár. Hann bió at Rauða-Biarnar-staoðom upp frá Eski-holte.  Hans son
vas Þorkell Trefill í Skarðe, ok Helge í Hvamme í Norðrár-dale--ok
es þar heygðr--ok Gunnvaldr, faðer Þorkels, es átte Helgo, dóttor
Þorgeirs af Víðe-mýre.10

6. Þórbirne Crum ok Þóre [123] Beigalda broeðrom gaf Skalla-Grímr
land fyr útan Gufu-aó. Bió Þórbiaorn í Crums-hólom [124] en Þórer
á Beigalda.

7. Þórðe Þurs, ok Þorgeire Iarðlang, ok Þórbiaorgo Stong systor þeirra,
gaf Skalla-Grímr land upp frá Einkunnom ok it ýtra með [125]15 Lang-aó.
Bió Þórðr á Þurs-staoðom, en Þorgeirr á Iarðlangs-staoðom, en Þórbiaorg
í Stangar-hollte.

8. Áne hét maðr, es Grímr gaf land miðle Lang-ár ok Hafrs-loekjar
[126]; hann bió at Ána-brecko. Hans son vas Onundr Sióne, faðer
Steinars ok Dollo, móðor Cormacs.20

9. Grímolfr bygðe fyrst á Grímolfs-staoðom. Við hann es kennd [[73:
ii. 4.]] Gríms-fit ok Grímolfs-loekr. Grímr hét son hans, es bió fyr
sunnan fiaorð; hans son vas Grímarr, es bió á Grímars-staoðom. Við
hann deilðo þeir Þorsteinn ok Tungo-Oddr.

10. Grane bió á Grana-staoðom í Digra-nese [127].

11. Þorfinnr enn Strange hét merkis-maðr Þórolfs Skalla-Gríms5
sonar. Hónom gaf Skalla-Grímr Sæunne dóttor sína, ok land fyr
útan Lang-aó til [128] Leiro-loekjar, ok upp til fiallz, ok til
Alft-ár; hann bió á Forse. Þeirra dótter vas Þórdís, móðer Biarnar
Hitdoela-kappa.

12. Yngvarr hét maðr, faðer Bero es Skalla-Grímr átte. Hónom10
gaf Grímr land miðle Leiro-loekjar ok Straum-fiarðar; hann bió á
Alfta-nese. Onnor dótter hans vas Þórdís es átte Þorgeirr Lambe á
Lamba-staoðom, faðer Þórðar, es þrælar Cetils Gufo brendo inne. Son
Þórðar vas Lambe enn Sterke [129].

13. Steinolfr hét maðr, es nam Hraun-dal hvárn-tveggja, allt15 miðle
Alft-ár ok Hit-ár [130] ok upp til Griót-ár, at leyfi Skalla-Gríms;
ok bió í enom syðra Hraun-dale. Hans son vas Þorleifr es Hraun-doeler
ero frá komner. Þórunn hét dótter Steinolfs, es átte Þorbiaorn Vífils
son, faðer Þórgerðar, móðor Ásmundar, faoðor Svein-biarnar, faoðor
Oddz, faoðor Gró, móðor Oddz á Alfta-nese.20


[[74: ii. 4.]]

14.  [131]Þórhaddr hét maðr ágætr, son Steins Miok-siglanda,
Vig­biods-sonar, Boðmóðs sonar or Bulka-rúme. Hann nam Hitár-dal
allan ofan til Griót-ár fyr sunnan; ok fyr norðan allt miðle Hit-ár
ok Kalld-ár til sióvar. Hans son vas Þórgeirr, faðer Hafþórs, faoðor
Goðnýjar, móðor Þorláks ens Auðga: Þorgeirs syner vóro5 þeir Grímr
í Skarðe, ok Þórarenn, Finnboge, Eysteinn, Gestr, Torbe [132].

15. Þórgils Cnappe, leysinge Colla Hroallz sonar, nam Cnappa-dal. Hans
synir vóro þeir Ingialdr, Þórarenn, ok Þórer [133] es bió at Okrom,
ok eignaðesk allt land miðle Hit-ár ok Alft-ár, ok upp til10 mótz við
Steinolf. Son Þóriss [134] (vas) Þróndr, es átte Steinunne dóttor Hrútz
af Kambs-nese: þeirra syner Þórer ok [135] Skúmr, faðer Torfa, faoðor
Tanna; hans son vas Hrútr es átte Kolfinno dóttor Illoga ens Svarta.

Nú ero þeir menn talðer es bygt hafa [136] í land-náme Skalla-Gríms.15


5. 1.  [137]Grímr hét maðr, Ingiallz son, Hroallz sonar or
Hadd­ingja-dale, bróðer Ása hersiss. Hann fór til Íslannz í
landa-leit, ok siglðe fyr norðan land. Hann vas um vettrenn í Grímsey
á Steingríms-firðe. Bergdís hét kona hans; en Þórer son.20


[[76: ii. 5.]]

2. Grímr roere til fiska um vettrenn [138] með þrælom sínom; ok son
hans vas með hónom. Ok es sveinenn tók at kala, þá foerðo þeir hann
í sel-belg, ok drógo at halsenom. Grímr dró marmennil [139]. Grímr
mælte [es hann kom upp]: 'Segðú oss ævi óra ok lang-líve, ella
koemr þú eigi heim.' [Hann svarar:] 'Engo varðar yðr at5 vita aðra
an sveinenn í sel-belgenom; [140] þvi at þú munt dauðr áðr vár kome;
en son þínn skal þar byggja ok land nema, sem Skalm, merr þín, legsk
under klyfjom.' Ecke fengo þeir fleire orð af hónom [141]. En síðar
um vettrenn andaðesk Grímr, ok es þar heygðr. [S: En síðar um vetrenn
reru þeir Grímr svá at sveinnenn var á10 lande, þá tyndoz þeir aller.]

Þau Bergdís ok Þórer fóro um váret or Grímsey, ok vestr yfer heiðe til
Breiða-fiarðar. Skalm geck fyrer allt sumaret ok lagðesk aldrege. Annan
vettr vóro þau á Skalmar-nese í Breiða-firðe. En of sumaret efter
snoero þau suðr. Þá geck Skalm fyrer,15 þar til es þau kómo af
heiðom suðr til Borgar-fiarðar, þar sem sand-melar tveir rauðer vóro
[142]. Þar lagðesk Skalm niðr under klyfjom under enom ýtra melnom: þar
nam Þórer land fyr sunnan Gnúp-aó til Kalld-ár, fyr neðan Knappa-dal
[143], allt miðle fiallz ok fiaoro. Hann bió at ýtra Rauða-mel.20

3. Þá vas Þórer gamall ok blindr, es hann kom út síð um kveld, ok
sá, at maðr roere útan í Kaldár-ós [144] á iarn-noekkva, mikill ok
[[78, 79: ii. 6.]] illilegr; ok geck þar á land upp til boejar þess,
es í Hripe heiter, ok gróf þar í staoðols-hliðe. En um nóttena kom
þar upp iarð-eldr, ok brann [145] þá Borgar-hraun--þar vas boerenn
sem nú es borgen.

4. Son Sel-Þóres vas Þórfinnr, es átte Iófríðe dóttor Tungo-Oddz.5
Þeirra syner vóro þeir Þórkell ok Þórgils, Steinn ok Galte, Ormr,
ok Þórormr, ok Þórer [146].

Dótter Þorfinnz vas Þórríðr, es átte Þórbrandr í Alfta-firðe.

Þeir Sel-Þórer frændr ener heiðno dó í Þóres-biaorg [147].

Þórgils ok Þórkell, syner Þórfinnz aótto báðer Unne dóttor Alfs í10
Daolom--Skalm dó í Skalmar-keldo.

5. Colbeinn Clak-haofðe, Atla son or Atleyjo af Fiaolom, fór til
Íslannz ok keypte laond aoll miðle Kald-ár ok Hitar-ár [148] fyr
neðan Sand-brecko, ok bió á Kolbeins-staoðom. Hans son vas Finnboge
í Fagra-skóge ok Þórðr Skálld.15

6. Þórmóðr Goðe ok Þórðr Gnúpa, syner Oddz ens Racka, Þórviðar sunar,
Freyviðar sonar, Alfs sonar af Vors: þeir broeðr fóro til Íslannz, ok
naómo land miðle Lax-ár ok Straumfiarðar-ár; hafðe Þórðr Gnúpo-dal, ok
bió þar; en síðan Skofte son hans. Hann [149] (vas) faðer Hiaorleifs
Goða, ok Finno es átte Refr enn mikle:20 þeirra son Dalcr, faðer
Steinunnar, móðor Skald-Refs.

[[79: ii. 6.]]

7. Þórmóðr bió á Rauðkollz-staoðom;--hann vas kallaðr Þórmóðr Goðe
[150],--ok átte Gerðe, dóttor Ceallacs ens Gamla. Þeirra son vas
Goðlaugr enn Auðge; hann átto Þórdíse, dóttor Svart-haofða, Biarnar
sonar Gollbera, ok Þórríðar Tungo-Oddz dóttor [151], es þá bió í
Haorgs-holte. Goðlaugr enn Auðge sá at Rauðamels-laond5 vóro betre
an aonnor laond þar í sveit; hann skoraðe á Þórfinn til landa, ok
bauð hónom holm-gaongo. Þeir urðo báðer óvíger á holme; en Þórríðr
Tungo-Oddz dotter groedde þá ok sætte.

8. Goðlaugr nam síðan land frá Straumfiarðar-aó til Furo miðle10 fiallz
ok fiaoro, ok bió í Borgar-holte--Frá hónom ero Straum­firðingar
komner. Hans son vas Goðleifr, es átte annan knaorr, en annan
Þórolfr son Loftz ens Gamla af Eyrar-backa, þá es þeir baorðozk við
Gyrð iarl Sigvalda son í Meðalfars-sunde, ok héldo fé síno.--Þar um
orte Goðleifr Gyrz-vísor.--Annarr son Goðlaugs15 vas Þorfiðr, faðer
Goðlaugs, faoðor Þórdísar, móðor Þórðar [f. Sturlo ens Gamla í Hvamme].

9. Vale enn Sterke hét hirðmaðr Harallz konungs ens Hárfagra. Hann vá
víg í véom, ok varð út-lagr. Hann fór til Suðreyja; en syner hans fóro
þrír til Íslannz;--Hlíf Hesta-gellder vas móðer20 þeirra;--einn hét
Atle; annarr Alfvarenn; þriðe Auðunn Stoðe [152]. [[81: ii. 6.]] Atle
Vala son ok Ásmundr son (hans) naómo land frá Furo til Lýso. Ásmundr
bió í Langa-holte at Þóro-toftom; hann átte Langaholltz-Þóro: en þá
es Ásmundr eldezk, skilðesk hann við Þóro fyrer mann-kvæmð, ok fór
í Öxl at bua til dauða-dags.

10. Ásmundr vas heygðr þar ok í skip lagiðr, ok þræll hans5 með hónom
sá es ser banaðe sialfr, ok vilðe eige lifa efter Ásmund. Hann vas
lagðr í annan stafn skipsens. Lítlo síðarr dreymðe Þóro, at Ásmundr
sagðe ser mein at þrælinum.--Þar heiter Ás­mundar-leiðe es hann es
heygðr--Vísa þesse vas heyrð í haug hans:


    Einn byggi ek stoð steina ...10


Efter þat vas leitað til haugsens ok vas þrællenn rekenn or skipeno.

Þóra lét goera skála of þióð-braut þvera, ok lét þar iamnan standa
borð; en hon sat úte á stóle, ok bauð hverjom [153] es mat vilde eta.15

Atle vas son Ásmundar, faðer Surtz, faoðor Goðleifs, faoðor Goð­brannz,
faoðor Surz Smiðs, faoðor Eyjolfs prestz munks.

11. Hrolfr enn Digre, son Eyvindar Eiki-krox, bróðer Illoga Fellz-goða
austan af Síðo, nam land frá Lýso til Hraun-hafnar. Hans son vas
Helge í Hofgaorðom, faðer Finnboga, ok Biarnar,20 ok Hrólfs, Biaorn
vas faðer Gestz, faoðor Skald Refs.

[[83: ii. 7.]] 12. Solve hét maðr, es land nam miðle Hellis-hrauns ok
Sleggjo-beins-ár. Hann bió í Brenninge fyrst; en síðan á Solva-hamre;
þvi at hann þóttesk þar vesa fleire manna gagn.


6. 1. Sigmundr son Ketils Þistils, þess es numit hafðe Þistils-fiaorð,
hann átte Hildigunne. Hann nam land5 miðle Hellis-hrauns ok
Berovíkr-hrauns. Hann bió at Laugar-brecko, ok es þar heygðr. Hann átte
þriá sono; einn vas Einarr, es þar bió síðan at Laugar-brecko. Þeir
feðgar selðo Lóns-land Einare, es síðan bió þar.--Hann vas kallaðr
Lón-Einarr.

2. Hval rak á fiaoro hans, ok skar hann af nackvat; hann sleit10
veðr út, ok rak á land Einars Sigmundar sonar. Lón-Einarr talðe
fiaolkynge Hildegunnar því valda. En þá es hvalenn hafðe út
rekit frá Lón-Einare, fór hann at leita, ok kom svá at, at Einarr
Sigmundar son skar hvalenn með húskarla sína. Hann hió þegar einn
þeirra bana-hoegg. Laugarbrecko-Einarr bað nafna sínn frá15 fara,
'Þvi at yðr mun eige duga at að soekja.' Lón-Einarr hvarf þá frá,
þvi at hann vas lið-vana. Einarr Sigmundar son flutte heim hvalenn. Ok
einn tíma es hann vas eige heima, fór Lón-Einarr til Laugar-brecko með
viida mann [154] ok stefnde Hildigunne um fiaolkynge. Hon vas dótter
Beiniss, Mós sonar, Naddoðs sonar20 or Færeyjom--Einarr kom heim þá
es Lón-Einarr vas ný-farenn á [[84: ii. 7.]] braut. Hildigunnr sagðe
hónom þesse tíðende, ok foerðe hónom kyrtil ný-goervan. Einarr tók
skiaold sínn, ok sverð, ok verk-hest, ok reið efter þeim, ok sprengðe
hann á Þúfo-biaorgom. Þá rann Einarr sem hann mátte. En þá es hann kom
hiá Draongom, sá hann troll-karl sitja þar á uppe, ok láta roa foetr,
svá at þeir tóko5 brimet, ok skellde þeim saman svá at sió-drif varð
af, ok quað víso.


    Vas ek þar es fell af fialle ...


Einar gaf oengan gaum at þesso. Þeir fundosk þar sem heita
Manna-fallz-breckor, ok baorðosk þar. En kyrtil Einars bito eige10
iárn. Fiórer menn fello af Lón-Einare, en tveir flýðo frá hónom
[155]. Þeir nafnar sóttosk lengi áðr sundr geck [156] brók-linde
Lón-Einars. En es hann tók þar til, hió nafne hans hann bana-hoegg;
en Hreiðarr, þræll Einars Sigmundar sonar, sá hann fara skyndilega
ok hlióp efter hónom; þá sá hann þræla Lón-Einars flýja; rann hann
þá efter15 þeim, ok drap þá báða í Þræla-vík. Fyrer þat gaf Einarr
hónom frelse, ok land svá [157] mikit sem hann fenge gert um of þriá
daga--þat heiter nú Hreiðars-gerðe es hann bió.

3. Einarr bió síðan at Laugar-brecko, ok es heygðr skamt frá
Sigmundar-hauge; ok es haugr hans iamnan groenn bæðe vettr ok20 sumar.

4.  [158]Einarr at Laugar-brecko átte Unne, dóttor Þóres, bróðor
Ásláks í Langa-dal: Hallveig vas dótter þeirra es Þorbiaorn Vífils
[[86: ii. 8.]] son átte. Breiðr hét annarr son Sigmundar, bróðer
Einars [159]; hann átte Gunnhilde, dóttor Ásláks or Langadale; þeirra
son vas Þórmóðr es átte Helgo Onundar dóttor, systor Skáld-Hrafns;
þeirra dótter Herþrúðr, es Simon átte; þeirra dótter Gunnhildr, es
Þorgils átte; þeirra dótter Valgerðr, móðer Finnboga ens Ramma, Geirs5
sonar. Þorkell hét enn þriðe son Sigmundar; hann átte Ióreiðe dóttor
Tinnz [160] Hallkels sonar [here is a blank left for 12 letters].

5. Þorkell hét son Lón-Einars; hann átte Grímo Hallkels dóttor,
fyrr an Þórgils Ara son.  Finnvarðr vas son þeirra [161]. Dótter
Laugarbrecko-Einars vas Arnóra, es átte Þorgeirr Vívils10 son;
þeirra dótter vas Yngvilldr, es átte Þorsteinn son Snorra Goða;
þeirra dótter Inguðr, es átte Ásbiaorn Arnorsson.


7. 1. Grímkell hét maðr, son Ulfs Kráko, Hreiðars sonar, bróðer
Gunnbiarnar, es Gunnbiarnar-sker ero við kend: hann nam land frá
Berovíkr-hraune til Nes-hrauns, ok út15 um Ondort-nes, ok bió at
Saxa-hvále. Hann rak braut þaðan Saxa Alfarensson, Vala sonar, es
bió síðan í Hraune hiá Saxa-hvále. Grímkell átte Þórgerðe, dóttor
Valþiófs ens Gamla; þeirra son vas Þórarenn Corne. Hann vas ham-ramr
miok, ok liggr í Corna-hauge--Þat kvað maðr es broteð hafðe haugenn:20

[[87: ii. 8.]]


    Hlióp ek í haugenn forna hvilt hefek lengr of morna:
    let ek á braut of borna belti ok hringinn Korna [162].


Þórarenn Corne átte Iórunne, dóttor Einars í Stafaholte; þeirra dótter
Iarn-gerðr, es átte Ulfr Ugga son.

2. Kloeingr hét annarr son Grímkels; hann átte Oddfríðe dóttor5 Helga
af Hvann-eyre. Þeirra son Colle [es átte Þórríðe dóttor Ásbrannz
frá Kambe; þeirra son vas Skegge, faðer Þórkotlo, es átte Illoge,
son Þorvallz, Tinnz sonar, faðer Gils es vá Giafvald. Bárðr hét annarr
son Colla; hann átte Valgerðe Viðars dóttor; Vígdís vas dótter þeirra,
es átte Þorbiaorn enn Digre; þeirra dótter10 Þórdís, es átte Þórbrandr
at Olfus-vatne; Þórer vas son þeirra, ok Biarne á Breiða-bólstað, ok
Torbe [en d. Valgerðr es átte Runolfr bps son]: Ásdís hét aonnor dótter
Bárðar; hána átte fyrr Þór­biaorn, Þorvallz son, bróðer Mána-Liótz
sam-moeðre. Baorn þeirra, Þórríðr es átte Þorgrímr Oddz son. Baorn
þeirra, Geirmundr í15 Máva-hlíð, ok xiiii aonnor. Ásdíse átte síðarr
Skúle Iorundar son. Valgerðr frá Mosfelle vas dótter þeirra] [163].

3. Alfarenn Vala son hafðe fyrst numet nesit allt miðle
Bero-víkr-hrauns ok Enniss; hans syner vóro þeir Haosculldr es bió
at Haoscollz-aóm, ok Ingialldr es bió at Ingiallz-hvále; en Gote at20
Gota-loek; en Holmkell at Forse við Holmkels-aó.

[[88: ii. 9.]]

4. Óláfr Belgr hét maðr es nam land fyr innan Enne til Fróð-ár,
ók bió í Óláfs-vík.

5. Ormr enn Mióve hét maðr, es kom skipe síno í Fróðár-ós, ok bió
á Brimils-vaollom nockora vettr. Hann rak braut Óláf Belg, ok nam
Víkena gomlo alla miðle Enniss ok Búlanz-haofða, ok bió5 síðan at
Fróð-aó. Hans son vas Þórbiorn enn Digre, es barðesk við Þóraren
Svarta, ok fell sialfr ok iii menn með hónom. Um þat orte Þórarenn
Máfhlíðinga-vísor; efter því sem seger í Eyrbyggja sogo; þesse es ein:


    Qveðen man ...10


Af þeim orðom baorðosk þeir annat sinn.

Þórbiaorn átte Þórríðe Barkar dóttor ens Digra, Þórsteins sonar
Þorska-bítz. Þeirra son vas Ketell Kappe, ok vas hann þá útan lannz;
hann vas faðer Hróðnýjar, es átte Þórsteinn son Víga-Styrs.

[S: Hans son vas Þorbiorn enn Digre; hann átte fyrr Þórríðe15 dóttor
Ásbrannz frá Kambe, ok vóro þeirra baorn, Ketill Kappe, Hallsteinn
ok Gunnlaugr [164], ok Þorgerðr es átte Onundr Sióne. Þorbiorn átte
síðan Þórríðe, dóttor Barkar ens Digra ok Þordísar Súrs dóttor.]

6.  [165][Þorbiorn enn Digre stefnde Geirríðe Boegifótz dóttor um20
fiolkynge; efter þat es Gunnlaugr son hans dó af meine því, es [[89:
ii. 9.]] hann tók þá es hann fór at nema fróðleik at Geirríðe--Hon
vas móðer Þórarens í Máva-hlíð.--Um þá saok vas Arnkell Goðe kvaddr
tolftar-kviðar [166]; ok bar hann af, þvi at Þórarenn vann eið
at stalla-hring, ok hratt svá máleno. En efter þat hurbo Þórbirne
stóð-hross á fialle. Þat kende hann Þórarne, ok fór í Máva-hlíð5 ok
sette dura-dóm. Þeir vóro tolf; en þeir Þórarenn vóro siau fyrer,
Alfgeirr Suðreyingr, ok Nagle, ok Biaorn Austmaðr, ok hús­karlar
þrír. Þeir hleypðo upp dómenom, ok baorðosk þar í túneno. Auðr,
kona Þórarens, hét á konor at skilja þá. Einn maðr fell af Þórarne
en tveir af Þórbirne. Þeir Þórbiorn fóro á braut, ok bundo10 saór
sín hiá stack-garðe upp með Vaógom. Haond Auðar fanzk í túne. Því
fór Þórarenn efter þeim, ok fann þá hiá garðenom. Nagle hlióp
grátande um þá, ok í fiall upp. Þar vá Þórarenn Þórbiorn, ok særðe
Hallstein til ólífiss. Fimm menn fello þar af Þórbirne. Þeir Arnkell
ok Vermundr veitto Þórarne, ok hofðo seto15 at Arnkels. Snorre Goðe
mælte efter Þórbiorn, ok sekðe þá alla, es at vígeno haofðo veret,
á Þórsness-þinge. Efter þat brende hann skip þeirra Algeirs í
Salteyrar-óse. Arnkell keypte þeim skip í Daogorðar-nese ok fylgðe
þeim út um eyjar--Af þesso goerðesk fiándskapr þeirra Arnkells ok
Snorra Goða. Ketill kappe vas þá20 útan: hann vas faðer Hróðnýjar es
átte Þorsteinn son Víga-styrs.]

[[91: ii. 9.]]

7. Sigurðr Svín-haofðe vas kappe mikill; hann bió á Kvern-vága-straond
[167]:

Heriolfr son hans vas þá átta vettra [168], es hann drap skógar-biaorn
fyre þat es hann hafðe biteð geit hans. Þar um es þetta kveðit:


    Berse bvin-razi beit geit fyr Heriolfe:5
    en Heriolfr hokin-raze [169] hefnde geitr á [170] bersa.


Þá vas Heriolfr tolf vettra es hann hefnde faoðor síns. Hann vas enn
meste afreks-maðr:

8. Heriolfr fór til Íslannz í elle sínne, ok nam land miðle
Búlannz-haofða ok Kirkju-fiarðar; hans son vas Þorsteinn Kol­skeggr,10
faðer Þórolfs, faoðor Þorarens (ens) Svarta Máf-hlíðings, ok Goðnýjar
es átte Vermundr enn Mióve; þeirra son vas Brandr enn Orve, ok dótter
[171] Þórfinna, es átte Þórsteinn Cugga son.


8. 1. Vestarr, son Þórolfs Bloðro-skalla; hann átte Svono [172]
Herroeðar dóttor: þeirra son Ásgeirr. Vestarr fór15 til Íslannz með
faoðor sínn af-gamlan, ok nam Eyrar-land, ok á miðle Kirkio-fiarðar ok
Kolgrafar-fiarðar, ok bió á Öndorðre-Eyre. [173] Þeir Þórolfr feðgar
ero báðer heygðer á Skalla-nese.

Ásgeirr Vestars son átte Helgo Ceallacs dóttor. Þeirra son vas Þórlákr;
hans son var Steinþórr ok þeirra Þórríðar dóttor Auðunnar20 Stota
[174]; ok Þórðr Blígr, es átte Oddcotlo, Þorvallz dóttor, Þor­mods
[[92: ii. 10.]] sonar Goða [175]; ok Þórmóðr es átte Þorgerðe
dóttor Þórbranz or Alfta-firðe: fiórðe vas Bergþórr es fell á
Vigra-firðe. Steinþórr átte Þórríðe dóttor Þorgils Ara sonar; Gunnlaugr
vas son þeirra, es átte Þórríðe ena Spaoko, dóttor Snorra Goða.

2. Colr hét maðr, es nam land útan (frá) Fiarðar-horne til5
Trolla-hals, ok út um Berserks-eyre til Hrauns-fiarðar. Hans son
vas Þórarenn ok Þórgrímr--Við þá es kent Collzsona-fell--Þeir feðgar
bioggo aller at Kol-graofom--Frá þeim ero Kolgreflingar komner.

3. Auðunn Stote son Vala ens Sterka, hann átte Myrunu dóttor10 Beadmacs
[176] Íra-konungs. Hann nam Hrauns-fiaorð allan fyr ofan hraun,
á miðle Svína-vatz ok Trolla-hals; hann bió í Hrauns-firðe, ok vas
mikill fyr ser ok sterkr [177]--þaðan ero Straum-firðingar komner.

4. Hann sá um haust, at hestr apal-grár hlióp ofan frá 'Hardns'-vatne
[178] ok til stóð-hrossa hans; sá hafðe under stóð-hestenn. Þá15 fór
Auðunn til, ok tók enn grá hest, ok sette fyr tveggja yxna sleða, ok
ók saman alla taoðo sína. Hestrenn vas góðr með-ferðar um há­deget;
en es á leið, steig [179] hann í vaollenn harðan til hóf-skeggja. En
efter sólar-fall sleit hann allan reiðing, ok hlióp til vatz upp
[180]; hann sásk ecke síðan.20

5. Son Auðunnar vas Steinn, faðer Helgo, es átte Ann í Hraune. [[94:
ii. 11.]] Þeirra son Már, faðer Goðríðar, móðor Ceartans, ok Ánar í
Kirkjo-felle: Ásbiaorn hét annarr son Auðunnar: þriðe Svarthaofðe;
en dótter Þórríðr es átte Steinþórr á Eyre; þeirra son Þórlákr.


9. 1. Biorn hét son Ketils Flatnefs, ok Yngvildar dóttor Ketils Veðrs
af Hringa-ríke hersiss. Biaorn sat efter5 at eignom faoðor síns þá
es Ketill fór til Suðreyja. En es Ketell hélt skaottom fyr Harallde
konunge enom Hárfagra, þá rak konungr Biaorn son hans af eignom, ok tók
under sik. Þá fór Biaorn vestr um haf, ok vilde þar ecke stadfestask,
ok eige við Cristne taka sem aonnor baorn Ketils.--Því vas hann
kallaðr Biaorn enn Austroene.10 Hann átte Geaflaugo Ceallacs-dóttor,
systor Biarnar ens Sterka.

2. Biaorn enn Austroene fór til Íslannz, ok nam land miðle
Hraun-fiarðar ok Stafs-ár, ok bió í Biarnar-haofn á Borgar-hollte,
ok hafðe sel-faor upp til Selja, ok átte rausnar-bú. Hann dó í
Biarnar-haofn, ok vas heygðr við Borgar-loek [181].15

3. Son þeirra Biarnar ok Giaflaugar vas Ceallacr enn Gamle, es
bió í Biarnar-haofn efter faoðor sínn; ok Óttarr, faðer Biarnar,
faoðor Vígfúss í Drápo-hlíð, es Snorre Goðe lét drepa. Annarr
son Óttars vas Helge; hann herjaðe á Skottland, ok feck [182]
þar at herfange Niðbiorgo, dóttor Beolans konungs ok Caðlínar,
dóttor20 [[96: ii. 12.]] Gongo-Hrólfs; hann feck hennar; ok vas
þeirra son Osvifr enn Spake, ok Einarr Skálaglam, es drucknaðe á
Einars-skere í Sela-sunde [183], ok kom skiaoldr hans á Skiald-ey,
en feldr á Feldar-holm. Einarr vas faðer Þórgerðar, móðor Herdísar,
móðor Steins skaldz. Osvifr átte Þórdíse dóttor Þióðolfs or Haofn;
þeirra baorn vóro,5 Úspakr, faðer Ulfs Stallara [f. Jons á Reyrvelle,
f. Erlendz Hí­mallda, f. Eysteins Erki-byskops] [184]; ok Þórolfr,
Torráðr, Einarr, Þorkell, Þórbiaorn--þeir urðo seker um víg Ceartans
Ólafs sonar,--ok Goðrún, móðer Þórðar Kattar [185], ok Þórleiks,
ok Bolla, ok Gelliss. Vilgeirr hét son Bearnar ens Austroena.10

4. Ceallacr enn Gamle átte Ástríðe [186], dóttor Hrolfs hersess ok
Ondóttar systor Olvéss Barna-karls. Þeirra son vas Þórgrímr Goðe;
hans syner Víga-Styrr, ok Vermundr Mióve, ok Brandr faðer Þórleiks
[187]. Dótter Ceallacs ens Gamla vas Gerðr es Þormóðr Goðe átte,
ok Helga es Ásgeirr á Eyre átte.15


10. 1. Þórolfr, son Ornolfs Fisk-reka, bió í Mostr--því vas hann
kallaðr Mostrar-skegg.--Hann vas blót-maðr mikill, ok trúðe á
Þór. Hann fór fyr ofríke Harallz konungs til Íslannz ok siglðe fyr
sunnan land. En es hann kom vestr fyr Breiða-fiaorð, skaut hann
aondoges-súlom sínom fyr borð--þar vas20 skorenn á Þórr.--Hann mælte
svá fyrer, at Þórr skylde þar á land [[97: ii. 12.]] koma, sem hann
vilde at Þórolfr bygðe. Hét hann því, at helga Þór allt land-nám
sítt ok kenna við hann. Þórolfr siglðe inn á Breiða-fiaorð, ok gaf
nafn firðenom. Hann tók land fyr sunnan (fiorðenn) nær miðjom. Þar
fann hann Þór rekenn í neseno [188]--þar heiter nú Þórs-nes--þeir
lendo þar inn frá í vágenn, es Þórolfr5 kallaðe Hofs-vág. Þar reiste
hann boe sínn; ok goerðe þar hof mikit, ok helgaðe Þór--þar heita nú
Hof-staðer. Fiaorðrenn vas þá nær ecke bygðr.

2. Þórolfr nam land frá Stafs-aó inn til Þórs-ár, ok kallaðe þat allt
Þórs-nes. Hann hafðe svá mikinn átrúnað á fialle því [189] es stóð10 í
neseno, es hann kallaðe Helga-fell [190], at þangat skylde eingi maðr
óþvegenn líta. Ok svá vas þar mikil frið-helge, at þar skyllde oengo
granda í fialleno, hvárke fé né maonnom, nema sialft genge braut. Þat
vas trua þeirra Þórolfs frænda, at þeir doee aller í fiallet.15

3. Þar á neseno es Þórr kom á land, hafðe Þórolfr dóma alla; ok þar
vas sett heraðs-þing með ráðe allra sveitar-manna.  En es menn vóro
þar á þinge, þá skylde eigi [191] hafa alf-reka á lande, ok vas ætlat
til þess sker eitt þat es þeir kaolloðo Drit-sker; því at þeir vildo
eige saurga [192] láta svá helgan vaoll.20

4. En þá es Þórolfr vas dauðr, en Þorsteinn son hans vas ungr, [[99:
ii. 13.]] þá vildo þeir Þórgrímr Ceallacs son ok Ásgeirr mágr hans
eige ganga í skeret oerna sínna; ok þolðo eige Þórs-nesingar þat,
es þeir vildo saurga svá helgan vaoll.  Því baorðosk þeir Þórsteinn
Þorska-bítr ok Þórgeirr Cengr við þá Þórgrím ok Ásgeir þar á þinge um
skeret; ok fello þar nockorer menn; en marger urðo5 sárer, áðr þeir
urðo skilðer. Þórðr Geller sætte þá. Ok með því at hvárger vildo láta
af síno mále, ok þá vas [193] vaollrenn uheilagr af heiftar-blóðe,
þá vas þat ráð teket, at foera braut þaðan þinget, ok inn í neset þar
sem nú es. Vas þar þá helge-staðr mikill. Þar stendr enn Þórs-steinn
[194], es þeir bruto þá menn um es þeir blótoðo;10 ok þar hiá es
sá dóm-hringr es þeir doemðo menn til blóta [195]: þar sette Þórðr
Geller fiórðungs-þing með ráðe allra fiórðungs-manna.

5. Son Þórolfs Mostrar-skeggs vas Hallsteinn Þorskafiarðar-goðe,
faðer Þórsteins Surtz ens Spaka--Ósc vas móðer Þórsteins Surtz, dótter
Þórsteins Rauðs. Annarr son Þórolfs vas Þorsteinn Þorska-bítr;15 hann
átte Þóro, dóttor Áleifs Feilans, systor Þórðar Gelliss; þeirra son
vas Þórgrímr, faðer Snorra Goða, ok Baorkr enn Digre, es vas faðer
Sáms es Ásgeirr vá.


11. 1. Geirroeðr hét maðr, es fór til Íslannz, ok með hónom Finngeirr
son Þórsteins Ondors, ok Ulfarr20 [[100: ii. 13.]] kappe. Þeir fóro
af Hálogalande til Íslannz. Geirroeðr nam land inn frá Þórs-aó til
Langadals-ár. Hann bió á Eyre.

2. Geirroeðr gaf land Ulfare skipvera [196] sínom tveim megin
Ulfars-fellz, ok fyr innan fiall.

3. Geirroeðr gaf Finngeire land um [197] Alfta-fiaorð. Hann bió5 þar
es nú heiter á Kárs-staoðom. Hann vas faðer Þorfinnz, faoðor Þórbrannz
í Alfta-firðe, es átte Þórbiorgo, dóttor Þórfinnz Sel-Þóris sonar.

4. Geirríðr hét syster Geirroeðar [198], es átt hafðe Biaorn, son
Bolverks Blindinga-trióno. Þórolfr hét son þeirra. Þau Geirríðr
fóro10 til Íslannz, efter lát Biarnar ok vóro enn fyrsta vettr á
Eyre. Um váret gaf Geirroeðr systor sínne bú-stað í Borgar-dale; en
Þórolfr fór útan ok lagðesk í víking: Geirríðr sparðe ecke mat við
menn, ok lét goera skála sínn um þióð-braut þvera; hon sat á stóle,
ok laðaðe úte geste, en borð stóð inne iamnan ok matr á [199].15

Þórolfr fór til Íslannz efter andlát Geirríðar. Hann skoraðe á Ulfar
til landa, ok bauð holm-gaongo.--Ulfarr vas gamall ok barn-lauss--hann
fell á holme; en Þórolfr varð sárr á foete, ok geck iamnan haltr
síðan--því vas hann Boege-fótr kallaðr.--Þórolfr tók laond sum efter
Ulfar, en sum Þórfinnr í Alfta-firðe, ok sette á20 leysingja sína,
Ulfar ok OErlyg.


[[102: ii. 13.]]

5. Geirroeðr á Eyre vas faðer Þórgeirs Cengs, es boeenn foerðe or
eyrenne upp under fiallet.  Hann vas faðer Þórðar, faoðor Atla.

Þórolfr Boege-fótr vas faðer Arnkels Goða, ok Geirríðar es átte
Þórolfr í Máva-hlíð, faðer Þórarens.5

6. Syner Þórbrannz í Alftafirðe, sonar [200] Þorfinnz, vóro þeir
Þórleifr Cimbe, ok Þóroddr, Snorre, Þórfiðr, Illoge, Þórmóðr: þeir
deilðo við Arnkel Goða um arf leysingja sínna, ok vóro at víge hans
með Snorra Goða á OErlygs-staoðom. Efter þat fór Þórleifr Cimbe
útan. Þá laust Arnbiaorn [201], son Ásbrannz or Breiða-vík, hann10
með grautar-þvaoro; Cimbe brá á gaman. Þórðr Blígr brá hónom því á
Þórsness-þinge, es hann bað Helgo [202] systor hans. Þá lét Cimbe
liósta Blíg með sand-torfo.--Af því gaorðosk deilor þeirra Eyrbyggja
ok Þórbrannz sona ok Snorra Goða. Þeir baorðosk í Geirvaor, ok í
Alfta-firðe, ok á Vigra-firðe.15

7. Þórbergr hét maðr es fór af Iafirðe til Íslannz, ok nam Langa-dal
hvárn-tveggja ok bió í enom ýtra. Hans son vas Áslákr, es átte
Arnleifo, dóttor Þórðar Gelliss: þeirra baorn, Illoge enn Ramme, ok
Gunnildr es Breiðr átte fyrr, en síðarr Halldórr á Holms-láttre. Illoge
enn Ramme átte Goðleifo, dóttor Ketils20 Smiðjo-drums; þeirra syner
Eyjolfr, ok Eindriðe ok Collr, ok Geller [203]; ok dótter Herþrúðr, es
átte Þórgrímr Vermundar son ens [[103: ii. 14.]] Mióva; ok Friðgerðr,
es Oddr Drafla son átte; ok Goðríðr, es Bergr [204] Þórmóðar son átte,
Þorláks sonar, en síðan Iaorundr í Skora-dal; ok Iódís, es átte Márr
son Illoga Ara sonar; ok Arnleif, es átte Colle [205] son Þórðar
Blígs--Frá Illoga ero Langdoeler komner.

8. Steinn Miok-siglande, son Vigbiods, bróðer Þóres Haust-myrks,5 nam
Skógar-straond til mótz við Þórberg, ok inn til Lax-ár [206]; hann
bió á Breiða-bólstað. Hans son vas Þórhaddr es nam [207] Hitardal,
ok Þórgestr es átte Arnóro dóttor Þórðar Gelles; þeirra syner Steinn
Laogsaogo-maðr [208], ok Ásmundr ok Hafliðe ok Þórhaddr.10

12. 1. Þórvalðr, son Asvalldz, Ulfs sonar, Yxna-Þóres sonar, ok
Eirikr Rauðe son hans, fóro af Iaðre fyr víga saker, ok naómo land á
Horn-straondom, ok bioggo [209] at Draongom. Þar andaðezk Þórvaldr:
Eirikr feck þá Þióðildar, dóttor Iaorundar Atla sonar, ok Þórbiargar
Knarrar-bringo, es þá átte Þórbiaorn enn15 Hauk-doelske. Rézk Eirikr
þá norðan, ok rudde land [210] í Hauka-dale. Hann bió á Eiriks-staoðom
hiá Vatz-horne.

Þá felldo þrælar Eiriks skriðo á boe Valþiófs á Valþiófs-staoðom;
en Eyjolfr Saurr, frænde hans, drap þrælana hiá Skeiðs-breckom upp
frá Vatz-horne. Fyr þat vá Eirikr Eyjolf Saur; hann vá ok20 [[104:
ii. 14.]] Holmgaongo-Hrafn at Leik-skaólom. Geirsteinn ok Oddr á
Iaorva, frændr Eyjolfs, mælto efter hann. Vas þá Eirikr goerr or
Hauka-dale. Hann nam þá Brok-ey ok OExn-ey, ok bió hann at Taoðom
[211] í Suðrey enn fyrsta vettr.

2. Þá léðe hann Þórgeste set-stocka. Síðan fór Eirikr í OExn-ey5 ok bió
á Eriks-staoðom. Þá heimte hann set-stocka sína ok náðe eige. Eirikr
sótte set-stocka á Breiða-bólstað; en Þórgestr fór efter hónom. Þeir
baorðosk skamt frá garðe at Draongom. Þar fello tveir syner Þorgestz,
ok noeckorer menn aðrer. Her efter haofðo hvárer-tveggjo seto. Styrr
veitte Eirike ok Eyjolfr Æso10 son [212] ór Svíney, ok syner Þórbrannz
or Alfta-firðe, ok Þórbiaorn Vívils son: en Þórgeste veitto syner
Þórðar Gelliss ok Þórgeirr or Hitar-dale, Áslákr or Langa-dale,
ok Illoge son hans. Þeir Eirikr urðo seker á Þórsness-þinge. Hann
bió skip í Eiriks-váge; en Eyjolfr leynde hónom í Dimunar-váge
meðan (þeir) Þórgestr leitaðe15 hans of Eyjar. Þeir Þórbiaorn [213]
ok Eyjolfr ok Styrr fylgðo Eirike út um Eyjar. Hann sagðe þeim, at
hann ætlaðe at leita lannz þess, es Gunnbiaorn, son Ulfs Kraóko, sá,
es hann rak vestr um Ísland, þá es hann fann Gunnbiarnar-sker. Hann
kvazk aftr mundo leita til vina sínna, ef hann fynde landet.20

3. Eirikr siglðe undan Snæfellz-iaokle [214], ok kom útan at Mið-iaokle
þar sem Blá-serkr heiter. Hann fór þaðan suðr með lande, at [[105:
ii. 14.]] leita þess, ef þannig være byggjanda [215]. Hann siglðe vestr
um Hvarf [216], ok vas enn fyrsta vettr í Eiriks-ey nær miðre enne
[217] Eystre-bygð [218]. Um várit efter fór hann til Eiriks-fiarðar,
ok tók ser þar bústað [219], ok gaf víða oernefne. Hann vas annan
vettr í Eiriks-holmom við Hvarfs-gnípo; en et þriðja sumar fór hann
allt norðr5 til Snæfellz, ok inn í Hrafns-fiaorð; þá lézk hann komenn
fyr botn Eiriks-fiarðar. Hvarf hann þá aftr, ok vas enn þriðja vettr
í Eiriksey fyr Eiriksfiarðar-minne.

4. Efter um sumaret fór hann til Íslannz [220], í Breiða-fiaorð. Hann
vas þann vettr á Holms-láttre með Ingólfe. Um váret baorðosk10 þeir
Eirikr ok Þórgestr, ok feck Eirikr ósigr. Efter þat vóro þeir sætter.

5. Þat sumar fór Eirikr at byggja land þat es hann hafðe fundet,
ok hann kallaðe Groena-land--þvi at hann sagðe þat menn mundo miok
fýsa þangat, at landet héte vel.15

6. Svá seger Are Þorgils son [221], at þat sumar fóro fimm skip ok
tottogo til Groena-lannz af Borgar-firðe ok Breiða-firðe. En fiórtán
kómosk út; sum rak aftr, en sum týndosk--þat vas sextán [222] vettrom
fyrr an Cristne være í laog teken á Íslande.

7. Heriolfr hét maðr, son Bárðar Heriolfs sonar, frænda Ingolfs20
land-náma-mannz: þeim Heriolfe gaf Ingolfr land á miðle Vágs ok [[106:
ii. 14.]] Reykja-ness. Heriolfr enn yngre [223] fór til Groena-lannz
með Eirike. [224] Með hónom vas á skipe Suðreyskr maðr Cristenn,
sá es orte Hafgerðingja-draópo. Þar es þetta stef í:--


    Mínar bið ek munka reyne meina-lausan farar beina:
    Heiðis halde hárrar foldar hallar dróttenn yfer mer stalle.5


Heriolfr nam Heriolfs-fiaorð, ok bió á Heriolfs-nese; hann vas enn
gaofgaste maðr.

8. Eirikr Rauðe nam Eiriks-fiaorð, ok bió í Bratta-hlíð; en Leifr
son hans efter hann.

9. Þessar menn naómo land á Groena-lande [225], ok fóro út með10
Eirike: Heriolfr Heriolfs-fiaorð; hann bió á Heriolfs-nese [226]:
Ketell Ketils-fiaorð: Hrafn Hrafns-fiaorð: Solve Solva-dal: Snorre
Þórbrannz son Alfta-fiaorð: Þórbiaorn Glora Siglo-fiaorð: Einarr
Einars-fiaorð: Hafgrímr Hafgríms-fiaorð ok Vatna-hverfe: Arnlaugr
Arnlaugs-fiaorð. En sumer fóro til Vestre-bygðar.15

10. Maðr hét Þorkell Far-serkr, systrungr Eiriks Rauða. Hann fór
til Groena-lannz með Eirike, ok nam Hvals-eyjar-(fiaorð) miðle ok
[227] Eiriks-fiarðar, ok bió í Hvals-eyjar-firðe. Frá hónom ero
Hvals-eyjar-firðingar [228] komner. Hann vas ramm-aukenn miok. Hann
lagðesk efter geldinge gaomlom út í Hvalsey, ok flutte útan20 á
bake ser, þá es hann vilde fagna Eirike frænda sínom; en ecki [[108:
ii. 15.]] vas sió-foert [229] skip heima--þat es laong haolf vika:
Þórkell es dysjaðr í túne í Hvals-eyjar-firðe, ok hefer iamnan síðan
genget þar um sýslor [230].


13. 1. Ingolfr enn Sterke ok Þórvalldr, syner Ána, Avallz s(onar)
Ongt-í-brióste, naómo land inn frá Lax-aó til5 Skraumu-laups-ár,
ok bioggo [231] á Holms-látre [232]. Son Þorvallz vas Þorleifr,
faðer Halldórs, es átte Gunnilde síðar, dóttor Ásláks Hroars sonar or
Langa-dale. Þeirra son Þórer, es átte Hallveigo, Tinnz dóttor, Hallkels
sonar. Þeirra son Brandr, es átte Þorgerðe Brannz dóttor. Þeirra son
vas Halldórr, es átte Þórkaotlo Þorgríms10 dótter. Þeirra son Brandr
prior enn Fróðe, es mest hefer skrifat Borgfirðinga-kynslóð [233].


14. 1. Óleifr enn Hvíte hét her-konungr. Hann vas son Ingiallz
konungs, Helga sonar, Óleifs [234] (sonar), Goðroeðar sonar, Halfdanar
sonar Hvítbeins Upplendinga konungs.15 Óleifr enn Hvíte herjaðe í
vestr-víking, ok vann Dyflinni á Írlande, ok Dyflinnar-skíre, ok
goerðesk þar konungr yfer; hann feck Auðar ennar Diúp-úðgo [235],
dóttor Ketels Flat-nefs, Biarnar sonar Buno, ágætz mannz í Norege
[236]; Þórsteinn Rauðr hét son þeirra. Óleifr fell á Írlande í
orrosto; en (þau) [237] Auðr ok Þórsteinn fóro þá í Suðreyjar; þar20
[[109: ii. 16.]] feck Þórsteinn Þórríðar, dóttor Eyvindar Austmannz,
systor Helga ens Magra: þau aótto maorg baorn: Óleifr Feilan hét son
þeirra, en doettr [238], Groa, ok Álof, Osk, Þórilldr, Þórgerðr,
ok Vígdís. Þórsteinn goerðesk her-konungr, ok rézk til lags [239]
með Sigroeðe [240] iarle enom Ríkja, syne Eysteins Glumro. Þeir
unno Cata-nes ok5 Suðrland, Ros ok Merævi [241], ok meirr an halft
Skottland; vas Þorsteinn þar konungr yfer, áðr Skottar sviko hann,
ok fell hann þar í orrosto.

2. Auðr vas [242] þá á Cata-nese es hon spurðe fall Þórsteins. Hon
let goera knaorr í skóge á laun; en es hon [243] vas buen, hélt hon
út10 í Orkneyjar: þar gifte hon Gró dóttor Þórsteins Rauðs; hon vas
móðer Greladar, es Þórfinnr Hausa-kliúfr átte. Efter þat fór Auðr at
leita Íslannz; hon hafðe á skipe með ser tottogo karla frialsa.

3. Collr hét maðr, Veðrar-Gríms son, Ása sonar hersiss: hann hafðe
forraóð með Auðe, ok vas mest virðr af henne: Collr átte15 Þórgerðe,
dóttor Þórsteins Rauðs.

4. Erpr hét leysinge Auðar; hann vas son Melduns iarls af Skottlande,
þess es fell fyrer Sigroeðe [244] iarle enom Ríkja. Móðer Erps
vas Myrgiol, dótter Gliomals Íra-konungs. Sigroeðr iarl tók
þau at herfange, ok þiáðe. Myrgiol vas ambótt kono iarls, ok20
[[110: ii. 16.]] þiónaðe henne trúlega; hon vas margs kunnande; hon
varð-veitte barn dróttningar úboret meðan hon vas í laugo [245]. Síðan
keypte Auðr hána dýrt, ok hét henne frelse, ef hon þiónaðe svá Þórríðe
kono Þórsteins Rauðs sem dróttningo: þau Myrgiol ok Erpr son hennar
fóro til Íslannz með Auðe.5

5. Auðr hélt fyrst til Færeyja, ok gaf þar Álofo [246], dóttor
Þórsteins Rauðs--þaðan ero Gaoto-skeggjar komner.

6. Síðan fór hon at leita Íslannz, ok kom á Vikrar-skeið [247] ok
braut þar. Fór hon á Kialar-nes til Helga Biolo bróðor síns. Hann bauð
henne þar með helminge [248] liðe síns; en henne þótte þat vesa10
van-boðet, ok kvað hann lenge lítil-menne vesa mondo. Hon fór þá
vestr á [249] Breiða-fiaorð til Biarnar bróðor síns; hann geck móte
henne með húskarla sína; ok létzk kunna veg-lynde systor sínnar,
ok bauð henne með alla sína menn. Þat þá hon.

7. Efter um váret fóro þau Auðr í Breiða-fiaorð inn í landa-leitan;15
þau aóto [250] daogorð fyr sunnan [251] Breiða-fiaorð þar sem nú
heiter Daogorðar-nes. Síðan fóro þau inn um Eyja-sund. Þau lendo við
nes þat es Auðr tapaðe kambe sínom--þat kallaðe hon Kambs-nes.

8. Auðr nam aoll Dala-laond [252] í innan-verðom firðenom frá20 [[III:
ii. 17.]] Daogorðar-aó til Skraumo-hlaups-ár. Hon bió í Hvamme við
Aurriða-ár-ós--þat heita Auðar-tofter. Hon hafðe boena-hald sítt á
Cross-hólom. Þar lét hon reisa crossa; þvi at hon vas skírð ok vel
truoð. Þar haofðo frændr hennar síðan átrúnað mikinn á hólana; vas
þar goerr haorgr [253], es blót tóko til trúðo þeir því at þeir dæe
í hólana; ok þar vas Þórðr5 Geller leiddr í, áðr syner hans toeke
mann-virðing [254]: sem seger í Saogo hans.


15. 1. Auðr gaf land skipverjom sínom ok leysingjom.

2. Cetill hét maðr es hon gaf land frá Skraumo-hlaups-aó til
Haorðadals-ár. Hann bió á Cetils-staoðom; hann vas10 faðer Vestliða,
ok Einars, faoðor Cleppiarns, ok Þórbiarnar, es Styrr vá; ok Þórdísar,
móðor Þórgestz.

3. Haorðr hét skipvere Auðar; hónom gaf hon Haorða-dal [255]. Hans son
vas Ásbiaorn, es átte Þórbiaorgo, dóttor Miðfiardar-Skeggja: þeirra
baorn, Hnake; hann átte Þórgerðe, dóttor Þórgeirs15 Hoeggvin-kinna;
ok Ingebiaorg, es Illoge enn Svarte átte [256].

4. Vívill [257] hét leysinge Auðar. Hann spurðe þess Auðe, hví hon
gaf hónom oengan bústað sem aoðrom maonnom. Hon kvað þat oengo [258]
skipta, kvað hann þar gaofgan mundo þickja sem hann være. [[112:
ii. 17.]] Hónom gaf hon Vívils-dal. Þar bió hann, ok átte deilor
við Haorð: son Vívils [259] vas Þorbiaorn, faðer Goðríðar es átte
Þorsteinn son Eiriks ens Rauða, en síðarr Þórfinnr Carls-emne. [Frá
þeim ero byscopar komner, Biaorn, Þórlákr, Brandr.] Annarr son Vívils
vas Þórgeirr, es átte Arnóro, dóttor Lón-Einars [260]. Þeirra dótter5
Yngvilldr, es átte Þórsteinn son Snorra Goða.

5. Hunde hét leysinge Auðar, Skotzkr; hónom gaf hon Hunda-dal. Þar
bió hann lenge.

6. Soeckolfr [261] hét leysinge Auðar; hónom gaf hon Soeckolfs-dal:
hann bió á Breiða-bólstað, ok es mart manna frá hónom komet [262].10

7. Erpe syne Mellduns iarls, es fyr vas geteð, gaf Auðr frelse,
ok Sauðafellz-laond.--Frá hónom ero Erplingar komner. Ormr het son
Erps: annarr Gunnbiaorn, faðer Arnóro es átte Kolbeinn Þórðar son:
þriðe Ásgeirr, faðer Þóraorno, es átte Sumarliðe Hrapps son: dótter
Erps vas Halldís, es átte Alfr í Daolom:15 Dufnall vas enn son Erps,
faðer Þórkels, faoðor Hiallta, faoðor Beines: Skate [263] vas enn
son Erps, faðer Þórðar, faoðor Gísla, faoðor Þórgerðar.

[[113: ii. 18.]]

8. Þórbiaorn hét maðr es bió at Vatne; hann átte ... [264] ok vas
þeirra dótter Hallfríðr es átte Haoscolldr í Laxár-dale; þau aótto
maorg baorn: Bárðr vas son þeirra; ok Þórleikr, faðer Bolla, es átte
Goðrúno Osvifs dóttor. Þeirra syner vóro þeir Þórleikr, ok Haosculldr,
Surtr ok Bolle: Herdís ok Þórgerðr doettr þeirra.5 Þórðr Ingunnar son
átte fyrr Goðrúno, ok vóro þeirra baorn, Þórðr Kaottr ok Arnkatla:
Þórkell Eyjolfs son átte Goðrúno síðast; þeirra baorn Geller ok
Riúpa. Bárðr Haoscullz son vas faðer Hallbiargar, es átte Hallr son
Víga-Styrs: Hallgerðr Snuin-bróc vas dótter Haoscullz, ok Þórgerðr,
ok Þórríðr.10

9. [Collr son Veðrar-Gríms nam Laxár]dal [265] allt til
Haukadals-ár. Hann vas kallaðr Dala-Collr; hann átte Þórgerðe dóttor
Þorsteins Rauðs; baorn þeirra vóro þau Haosculldr ok Groa, es átte
Véleifr enn Gamle; ok Þórkatla, es Þórgeirr Goðe átte. Haoskulldr átte
Hallfríðe, dóttor Þórbiarnar frá Vatne; Þórleikr vas son þeirra;15
hann átte Þórríðe, dóttor Arnbiarnar, Sleito-Biarnar [266] sonar:
þeirra son vas Bolle. Haoscolldr keypte Melcorco dóttor Myrceartans Íra
konungs. Þeirra son vas Óleifr [267] Páe, ok Helge. Doettr Haoscullz,
Þórríðr, ok Þórgerðr, ok Hallgerðr Snuin-bróc. Óleifr átte Þórgerðe,
dóttor Egils Skalla-Gríms sonar; þeirra son Ceartan [268], ok20
Halldórr, Steinþórr, ok Þorbergr: Doettr Óleifs, Þórríðr, Þórbiaorg
Digra, ok Bergþóra. Ceartan átte Hrefno, dóttor Ásgeirs Æðe-collz:
þeirra syner [269], Ásgeirr, ok Scúmr.

[[114: ii. 18.]]

9. b. [Laxd. S. ch. 31: Þórríðe átte Guðmundr Solmundar son í
Ásbiarnar-nese; Hallr hét son þeirra, ok Barðe, Steinn ok Steingrímr:
Guðrún hét dótter þeirra, ok Álof: Þorbiaorg Digra vas gift vestr í
Vatzfiaorð Ásgeire Knattar syne; hann vas gaofugr maðr: þeirra son vas
Ceartan, faðer Þórvaldz, foðor Þórðar5 [f. Snorra, f. Þorvaldz. Þaðan
es komet Vatzfirdinga-kyn]. Síðan átte Þórbiaorgo Vermundr Þórgríms
son; þeirra dótter Þór­finna, es átte Þorsteinn Cugga son: Bergþóra,
dótter Óleifs vas gift vestr í Diúpafiaorð Þórhalle Goða Odda syne
[270]. Þeirra son vas Ceartan, faðer Smið-Sturlo; hann vas fóstre
Þórðar Gils sonar.]10

10. Heriolfr, son Eyvindar Ellz, feck síðar Þórgerðar [271] dóttor
Þórsteins Rauðs. Hrútr vas son þeirra; hónom gallt Haosculldr í
móðor-arf sínn Cam-nes land miðle Haukadals-ár, ok hryggjar þess es
gengr or fialle ofan í sió: Hrútr bió á Hrútz-staoðom; hann átte
Hallveigo, dóttor Þórgríms or Þyckva-skóge, systor Arn­móðs15 ens
Gamla; þau aótto maorg baorn; þeirra son vas Þórhallr, faðer Halldóro,
móðor Goðlaugs, faoðor Þórdísar, móðor Þórðar [f. Sturlo í Hvamme]:
Grímr vas sonr Hrútz, ok Márr [272], Endriðe, ok Steinn, Þórliótr,
ok Iaorundr, Þorkell, Steingrímr, Þórbergr, Atle, Arnórr, Márr, Carr,
Cugallde: en dættr, Bergþóra, Steinunn,20 Riúpa, Finna, Ástríðr.

11. Auðr gaf dótter Þórsteins Rauðs, Þórhilde, Eysteine Mein-fret,
syne Alfs or Osto: þeirra son vas Þórðr, faðer Kolbeins, [[115:
ii. 19.]] faoðor Þórðar Skallz: ok Alfr í Daolom; hann átte Halldíse,
dóttor Erps; þeirra son vas Snorre, faðer Þórgils Haollo sonar: Dættr
Alfs í Daolom vóro þær Þórgerðr, es átte Are Mars son; ok Þórelfr,
es átte Havarr, son Einars, Cleps sonar; þeirra son Þórgeirr: Þórolfr
Refr vas ok son Eysteins, es fell á Þingnes-þinge or liðe Þórðar
[273] Gelliss, þá5 es þeir Tungo-Oddr baorðosk; Hrappr hét enn fiórðe
Eysteins son.

12. Auðr gaf Osc, dóttor Þórsteins, Hallsteine Goða; þeirra son vas
Þorsteinn Surtr.

13. Vígdíse Þórsteins dóttor gaf Auðr Campa-Gríme; þeirra dótter
Arnbiaorg, es Ásolfr Flose átte í Haofða; þeirra baorn Oddr,10 ok
Vígdís, es átte Þorgeirr Caðals son.

14. Auðr foedde Óleif Feilan, son Þorsteins Rauðs. Hann feck Aldísar
[274] ennar Barreysko, dóttor Conals, Steinmóðs sonar, Olves sonar
Barna-karls. Sonr Conals vas Steinmóðr, faðer Hall-dóro, es átte
Eilífr, son Ketils Einhenda.15

Þeirra baorn, Þórðr Geller [es átte Hroðnýjo dóttor
Miðfiarðar-Skeggja. Þeirra syner vóro, Eyjolfr (enn) Grae, Þórarenn
Fyls-enne, Þórkell Cugge. Eyjolfr enn Grae átte ... Þeirra syner
Þórkell ok Bolverkr.... [[117: ii. 19]] Þórarenn Fylsenne átte
Fríðgerðe, dóttor Þórðar frá Hofða; þeirra son Skegge ok dótter Vígdís,
es Hrafn Hlymreks-fare átte ....: Þorkell Cugge átte Þórríðe, dóttor
Ásgeirs æðe-collz, þeirra son Þorsteinn. Dótter Óleifs Feilans vas]
[275] Þóra, móðer Þórgríms, faoðor Snorra Goða; hon vas ok móðer Barkar
ens Digra, ok Mars,5 Hallvarðz sonar Ingialdr ok Grane voro syner
Óleifs Feilans: Vígdís hét (aonnor) dótter Óleifs Feilans .... [276]:
Helga hét en þriðja dótter Óleifs; hána átte Gunnarr Hlífar son; þeirra
dótter Iófríðr, es Þóroddr Tungo-Oddz son átte, en síðarr Þorsteinn
Egils son; Þórunn vas aonnor dótter Gunnars es Hersteinn Blund-Cetils
son átte; Rauðr ok Haugud' vóro syner Gunnars:10 Þórríðr [277] hét
en fiórða dótter Óleifs Feilans; hána átte Þórarenn Raga-bróðer;
þeirra dótter vas Vígdís, es Steinn Þórarins son átte at Rauða-mel.

15. Auðr vas vegs-kona mikil. Þá es hon vas elle-móð, bauð hon til sín
frændom sínom ok maógom, ok bió dýrliga veizlo. En15 es þriár nætr
hafðe veizlan staðet, þá valðe hon giafar vinom sínom, ok réð þeim
heilræðe. Sagðe hon, at þá skyllde standa veizlan enn þriár nætr;
hon kvað þat vesa skyldo erbe sítt. Þá nótt efter andaðesk hon, ok
vas grafen í floeðar-mále, sem hon hafðe fyrer [[117: ii. 19.]] sagt;
þvi at hon vilde eige liggja í óvígðre moldo, es hon vas skírð.--Efter
þat spilltesk trua frænda hennar.


16. 1. Ceallacr hét maðr, son Biarnar ens Sterka, bróðer Giaflaugar,
es átte Biaorn enn Austroene. Hann fór til Íslannz, ok nam land frá
Daogurðar-aó til Klofninga; ok bió á5 Ceallacs-staoðom; hans syner vóro
[278] Helge Hrogn; ok Þórgrímr Þaungull under Felle; Eilífr Prude;
Ásbiaorn Vodve á Ara-staoðom [279]; Biaorn Hvalmage í Túngarðe;
Þorsteinn þynning; Gizurr Glade í Skora-vík; Þorbiaorn Skrofuðr á
Cetils staoðom; (en dótter) Æsa í Svíney, móðer Eyjolfs ok Tinforna.10

2. Liótolfr hét leysingi Ceallacs [280]; hónom gaf Ceallacr
bústað á Liótolfs-staoðom inn frá Kalda-kinn [281]. Hans syner
vóro (þeir) Þorsteinn, ok Biorn, ok Hrafse--hann vas Risa
ættar at móðerne. Liótolfr vas iarn-smiðr. Þeir réðosk út í
Fellz-skóga á Liótolfs-staðe; ok Vífill vin þeirra [282] es bió
á Vífils-toftom. Þórunn at15 Þórunnar-toftom vas móðer Oddmars ok
fóstra Ceallacs, sonar Biarnar Hvalmaga. Álof dótter Þórgríms under
Felle tók oersl. Þat kendo menn Hrafsa; en hann tók Oddmar hiá hvílo
hennar, ok sagðe hann sig valda: þá gaf Þorgrímr hónum Deildar-ey
[283]: Hrafse kvazk mundo hoeggva Oddmar á henni [284], eðr [285]
hann boette20 [[118: ii. 19.]] fyrer eyna [286]. Eige vilde Ceallacr
láta eyna. Hrafse tók skip [287] þeirra or torf-nauste. Ceallacs syner
fóro efter ok naóðo eige: efter þat sótto þeir Eilífr Hrafsa [288]
í eyna. Or kom i þanen Eilíjfs i Gras ok hamaðest hann. Biaorn
Hvalmage vá Biaorn Liótolfs son [289] at leik. Þeir Liótolfr
keypto at Oddmare, at hann koeme Bírne í foere Ceallacs5 syne
[290]. Ceallacr unge rann efter hónom. Eige varð hann sóttr áðr þeir
tóko sveinenn. Ceallac vógo þeir á Ceallacs-hóle; hann vas þá vii vetra
[291]. Efter þat sótto Ceallacs syner Liótolb ok Þorstein í iarð-hús
í Fellz-skógom, ok fann Eilífr annan munna; geck hann á bak þeim,
ok vá þá báða. Hrafse geck inn á Ara-staoðom,10 es Ceallacr sat við
elld at heim-boðe. Hrafse vas í kven-klæðum; hann hió til Ceallacs,
en hann kastaðe yfer sik skilde sínom, ok geck sundr hand-leggr hans;
en varð eige sárr. Hrafse geck um dyrr þær es á veggnom vóro, ok vá
Ásbiaorn; ok komzk hann síðan braut. Ceallacs syner keypto at Þórðe
Vívils syne, at15 koma Hrafsa í fære við þá. Hann sagðe Hrafsa, at oxe
hans læge í keldo; Þórðr bar skiaold hans; ok es hann sá Ceallacs-sono,
[[120: ii. 19.]] kastaðe hann skildenom til þeirra. Hrafse greip Þórð,
ok kastaðe hónom ofan fyr kleifena, ok varð þat bane hans. Eige gaóto
Ceallacs syner sótt hann, fyr an þeir felldo at hónom viðo. Eilífr
sat hiá meðan þeir sótto hann [292].


17. 1.  [293]Hiorleifr horða-konungr, es kallaðr vas5 enn Kven-same;
hann átte Æso ena Lióso; þeirra son vas Útryggr, faðer Úblauðs, faoðor
Haogna ens Hvíta, faoðor Ulfs ens Skiálga. Annarr son Hiaorleifs
vas Hálfr konungr es réð Hálfs-reckom [294]; hans móðer vas Hildr en
Mióva, dótter Haogna í Niarðey. Hálfr konungr vas faðer Hiaors konongs,
es hefnde10 faoðor síns með Solva Haogna-syne.

2. Hiaorr konungr herjaðe á Biarma-land; hann tók þar at herfange
Liuvinu [295], dóttor Biarma-konungs. Hon vas efter á Roga-lande þá es
Hiaorr konungr fór í hernað. Þá ól hon sono tvá; hét annarr Geir-mundr,
en annarr Há-mundr; þeir vóro svarter15 miok. Þá ól ambótt hennar son,
sá hét Leifr son Loðhattar þræls. Leifr vas hvítr: því skifte dróttning
sveinom við ambóttena, ok eignaðe ser Leif. En es konungr kom heim, vas
hann ílla við Leif, ok kvað hann vesa smá-mannligan. Nest es konungr
fór í víking, bauð dróttning heim Braga skálde, ok bað hann skynja
[296]20 [[121: ii. 19.]] um sveinana--þá vóro þeir þre-vetrer; hon
byrgðe þá í stofo hiá Braga, en fal sik í pallenom. Brage kvað þetta:


    Tveir 'ro inne, true ek baóðom vel,

[**ERROR: Contains unhandled entity &oogon;]
    Hámundr ok Geirmundr Hi&oogon;rvi borner:
    En Leifr þriðe Loðhattar son;5
    Faodde þýr þann; manat þræll in verre! [297]


Hann laust sprota á pallenn þann es dróttning vas í. Þá es [298]
konungr kom heim, sagðe hón hónom þetta, ok sýnde hónom sono sína
[299]. Hann kvazk eige slík Heljar-skinn séð hafa--þeir vóro svá
kallaðer síðan báðer broeðr.10

3. Geirmundr Heljar-skinn vas her-konungr. Hann herjaðe í vestr-víking,
en átte ríke á Roga-lande. En es hann kom or hernaðe es hann hafðe
lenge braut vereð, þá hafðe Haraldr konungr Hárfagre barizk í
Hafrs-firðe við Eirek Haorða-konung, ok Sulka konung af Roga-lande,
ok Ceotva-enn-Auðga, ok fenget15 sigr. Hann hafðe þá lagt under
sik allt Roga-land, ok reket þar marga menn af oeðlom sínom. Sá þá
Geirmundr einge sínn kost at fá þar soemðer. Hann tók þá þat ráð,
at fara at leita Íslannz. Til ferðar rézk með hónom Ulfr enn Skiálge
frænde hans; ok Steinolfr enn Láge, son Hrólfs Hersiss af Ogðom,
ok Ondóttar20 systor Olvess Barna-karls.

Þeir Geirmundr hofðo [300] sam-flot, ok stýrðe síno skipe hverr
þeirra. [[123: ii. 19.]] Þeir tóko Breiða-fiaorð, ok laógo við
Elliða-ey. Þá spurðo þeir, at fiaorðrenn vas bygðr et syðra, en
lítt eða ecki et vestra. Geirmundr hélt inn at Meðal-fellz-straond,
ok nam land frá Fábeins-aó til Klofa-steina [301]. Hann lende í
Geirmundar-váge, ok vas enn fyrsta vetr í Búðar-dale. Steinolfr nam
land inn frá Klofa-steinom, en5 Ulfr fyr vestan fiaorð,--sem enn
mun sagt verða. Geirmunde þótte land-nám sítt lítið, es hann hafðe
rausnar-bú ok fiaolmennt, svá at hann hafðe átta tige frelsingja. Hann
bió á Geirmundar-staoðom under Skarðe. [302]

4. Maðr hét Þróndr Mió-beinn; hann for til Íslannz með Geirmunde10
Heljar-skinne; hann vas ættaðr af Ogðom. [303] Þróndr nam eyjar
fyr vestan Biarneyja-floa, ok bió í Flatey. Hann átte dóttor
Gils Skeiðar-nefs: þeirra son vas Hergils Hnapp-raz [304] es
bió í Hergils-ey. Dótter Hergils vas Þórkatla, es átte Marr á
Reykja-hólom. Hergils átte Þóraorno, dóttor Ketils Ilbreiðs. Ingialldr
[305]15 vas son þeirra, es bió í Hergils-ey ok veitte Gísla Súrs
syne; fyrer þat goerðe Baorkr enn Digre af hónom eyjarnar; en hann
keypte Hlíð í Þorska-firðe. Hans son vas Þórarenn, es átte Þórgerðe,
dóttor Glúms Geira sonar; ok vas þeirra son Helgo-Steinarr. Þórarenn
vas með Ceartan í Svína-dale þá es hann fell.20

5. Þá bió Þróndr Mió-beinn í Flatey, es þeir Oddr Skraute ok [[124:
ii. 20.]] Þórer son hans kómo út. Þeir naómo land í Þorska-firðe. Bió
Oddr í Skógom; en Þórer fór útan, ok vas í hernaðe. Hann feck goll
mikit á Finn-maork. Með hónom vas sonr [306] Hallz af Hof-staoðom. En
es þeir kómo til Íslannz, kallaðe Hallr til gollzens; ok urðo þar um
deilor miklar.--Af því goerðesk Þorskfirðinga Saga. Goll-Þórer5 bió á
Þóris-staoðom ok vas et mesta afar-menne [307]: hann átte Ingibiaorgo
dóttor Gils Skeiðar-nefs. Þeirra son (vas) Guðmundr [308].

6. Geirmundr fór vestr á Strander, ok nam land frá Ryta-gnúp vestan
til Horns; en þaðan austr til Straum-ness. Þar goerðe hann fiogor bú:
eitt í Aðal-vík; þat varð-veitte ármaðr hans:10 annat í Cearans-vík;
þat varð-veitte Cearan þræll hans: þriðja á Almenningom enom Vestrom;
þat varð-veitte Biaorn þræll hans es sekr varð um sauða-taoko þá es
Geirmundr vas allr. Hans sekðar-fé urðo almenningar: fiórða bú átte
Geirmundr í Barz-vík; þat varð-veitte Atle þræll hans, ok hafðe hann
tolf [309] þræla15 under ser. En es Geirmundr fór á meðal bua sínna,
þá hafðe hann iamnan átta tige manna. Hann vas stór-auðigr at lausa-fé,
ok hafðe of kvik-feár. Svá segja menn, at svín hans genge á Svína-nese;
en sauðer á Hiarðar-nese; en hann hafðe sel-faor í Bitro. Sumer
segja, at hann hafe ok bú átt í Selár-dale á Geirmundar-staoðom20 í
Steingríms-firðe. Þat segja vitrer menn, at [[126: ii. 21.]] hann hafe
gaofgastr veret allra land-náms-manna á Íslande. En lítt átte hann
her deilor við menn, þvi at hann kom heldr gamall út. Þeir Ceallacr
deilðo um land þat es vas meðal Klofninga ok Fábeins-ár, ok baorðosk á
ekronom fyr útan Klofninga. Þar vildo hvárer-tveggjo sá [310]. Veitte
Geirmunde betr. Þeir Biaorn enn Aust­roene5 ok Vestarr af Eyre sætto
þá. Þá lende Vestarr í Vestars-nese, es hann fór til fundarens.

Geirmundr fal fé mikit í Andar-keldo under Skarðe. Hann átte Herríðe
dóttor Gautz Gautreks sonar ens Orva; þeirra dótter Ýr, es átte
Cetill; þeirra son Þórhallr, ok Odde, faðer Hallvarar, es10 átte Baorkr
Þormotz (son) Þióstars sonar. Síðan átte hann Þórkaotlo dóttor Ófeigs
Þorolfs sonar, þeirra baorn Geirríðr ok ... [311] Geirmundr andaðesk
á Geirmundar-staoðom, ok vas hann lagðr í skip í skógenn þar út frá
garðe [312]. Geirmundr gaf Hrolfe Ceallacs syne, vin sínom, bústað
at Ballar-aó: hans son vas Illoge enn Rauðe;15 ok Solve, faðer Þórðar
[f. Magnuss, f. Solva, f. Pals prestz í Reykjaholte].


18. 1. STEINOLFR enn LÁGE, son Hrólfs hersiss af Ogðom, nam land
inn frá Klofa-steinom til Griót-vallar-múla, ok bió í Fagra-dale á
Steinolfs-hialla. Hann geck þar inn20 á fiallet; hann sá þar fyr
innan dal mikinn ok vaxinn allan viðe; hann sá eitt rióðr í dale
þeim; þar lét hann boe goera ok kallaðe [[126: ii. 21.]] Saur-boe;
þvi at þar vas mýr-lent miok; ok svá kallaðe hann allan dalenn--þat
heiter nú Torf-nes es boerenn vas goerr. Steinolfr átte Eirnyju
[313], Þiðranda dóttor; Þórsteinn boande vas son þeirra; en Arndís
en Auðga vas dótter þeirra, móðer Þórðar, faoðor Þórgerðar, es Oddr
átte. Þeirra son vas Hrafn Hlymreks-fare, es átte5 Vígdíse dóttor
Þórarens Fyls-ennis. Þeirra son vas Snaortr, faðer Iódísar, es átte
Eyiolfr Hallbiarnar son; þeirra dótter Halla, es átte Atle Tanna son
[þeirra dótter Yngvilldr es átte Snorre Húnboga son] [314].

Steinolfe hurfo svín þriú: þau fundosk tveimr [315] vettrom síðarr
í10 Svína-dale, ok vóro þá þrír teger saman.

Steinolfr nam ok Steinolfs-dal í Króks-firðe.

2. Sleito-Biaorn [316] hét maðr, hann átte Þórriðe dóttor Steinolfs
ens Lága. Hann nam land með ráðe Steinolfs enn vestra dal í Saur-boe;
hann bió á Sleitu-Biarnar-staoðom upp frá Þverfelle.15 Hans son
Þióðrekr, es átte Arngerðe, dóttor Þórbiarnar, Skialda-Biarnar sonar;
þeirra son vas Víga-Sturla, es boeenn reiste at [317] Staðar-hóle:
ok Cnaottr, faðer Ásgeirs: ok Þórbiaorn; ok Þióðrekr, es borgen es
við kend á Colla-fiarðar-heiðe. Þióðreke Sleito-Biarnar syne þótte of
þroeng-lent í Saurboe; því rézk hann til Ísa-fiardar.20 Þar goerisk
[318] saga þeirra Þórbiarnar ok Hávarðar ens Halta.

[[128: ii. 22.]]

3. Óláfr Belgr, es Ormr enn Mióve rak braut or Óláfs-vík,
nam Belgs-dal, ok bió á Belgs-staoðom áðr þeir Þióðrekr raóko
hann braut. Síðan nam hann inn frá Griótvallar-múla, ok bió í
Óláfs-dale. Hans son vas Þórvaldr, sá es sauða-taoko saok selðe á
hendr Þórarne Giallanda Ogmunde Volo-Steins syne. Fyrer þat vá5 hann
Ogmund á Þorskafiarðar-þinge.

4. Gils Skeiðar-nef nam Gils-fiaorð miðle Óláfsdals ok
Króks-fiarðar-múla; hann bió at Kleifom. Hans son vas Heðinn, faðer
Halldórs Garpsdals-goða, faoðor Þórvallz í Garpsdal, es átte Goð­rúno
Osvifrs [319] dóttor.10

5. Þórarenn Krókr nam Króks-fiaorð til Hafra-fellz, frá
Króks-fiarðar-nese. Hann deilðe um Steinolfs-dal við Steinolf enn
Lága; ok roere efter þeim við tottogo [320] menn, es hann fór or sele
með siaunda mann. Þeir baorðosk við Fagradals-ár-ós á eyronom. [321]
Þá kvómo menn til frá húse at hialpa Steinolfe.  Þar fell Þórarenn15
Krókr ok þeir fiórer, en siau menn af Steinolfe: par ero kumbl þeirra.

6. Ketill Ilbreiðr nam Bero-fiaorð, son Þórbiarnar Talkna; hans dótter
vas Þórarna es átte Hergils Hnappraz: sem fyrr es ritið.

7. [S: Þróndr Mió-beinn átte dóttor Gils Skeiðar-nefs: þeirra20 dótter
vas Þórarna, er átte Hrólfr, son Helga ens Magra: Þórbiaorg [[129:
ii. 22.]] Knarrar-bringa vas aonnor dótter Gils Skeiðar-nefs. Herfiðr
hét son hans, es bió í Króksfirðe.] [322]


19. 1. Ulfr enn Skiálge, son Haogna ens Hvíta, nam Reykja-nes allt
miðle Þorskafiarðar ok Hafra-fellz. Hann átte Biaorgo, dóttor Eyvindar
Aust-mannz, systor Helga (ens)5 Magra. Þeirra son vas Atle enn Rauðe,
es átte Þórbiaorgo, systor Steinolfs ens Lága. Þeirra son vas Márr á
Hólom, es átte Þór­kaotlo, dóttor Hergils Hnappraz. Þeirra son vas Are.

2. Hann varð sæ-hafe [323] til Hvítra-manna-lannz--þat kalla sumer
Írland et Mykla: þat liggr vestr í haf ner Vínlande [324] eno
Góða:--þat10 es kallat sex doegra sigleng vestr frá Írlande.--Þaðan
náðe eige Are braut at fara, ok vas þar skírðr. Frá þesso sagðe
fyrst [325] Hrafn Hlymreks-fare, es lenge hafðe veret í Hlymreka á
Írlande. Svá kvað Þorkell Gellis-son [326] segja Íslenzka menn, þá es
heyrt haofðo frá segja [327] Þórfinn iarl í Orkneyjom, at Are hefðe
kendr veret15 á Hvítramanna-lande, ok næðe [328] eige braut at fara;
en vas þar vel virðr.

3. Are átte Þórgerðe dóttor Alfs í [329] Daolom. Þeirra son vas
Þórgils, ok Goðleifr, ok Illoge--þat es Reyknesinga-kyn.

4. [S: Iorundr hét son Ulfs ens Skiálga; hann átte Þorbiaorgo20 [[130:
ii. 23.]] Knarrar-bringo; þeirra dótter vas Þióðhildr es átte Eirikr
Rauðe. Þeirra son Leifr enn Heppne á Groena-lande.]

5. [S: Iaorundr hét son Atla ens Rauða; hann átte Þórdíse dóttor
Þórgeirs Suðo; þeirra dótter vas Oddkatla es átte Þórgils Collz
son. Iaorundr vas ok faðer Snorra.]5


20. 1. Hallsteinn, son Þórolfs Mostrar-skeggs, nam
Þorskafiarðar-straond [330]; ok bió á Hallsteins-nese. Hann blótaðe
Þór til þess at hann sende hónom aondoges-súlor; ok gaf þar til son
sínn. Efter þat kom tré á land hans; þat vas lx [331] alna langt,
ok tveggja faðma digrt. Þat vas haft til aondoges-súlna,10 ok vóro
þar af goervar aondoges-súlor nær á hverjom boe um þver-fiaorðo.--Þar
heiter nú Grene-trés-nes, es tréið kom á land.

Hallsteinn hafðe herjat á Skotland, ok tók þar þá þræla es hann hafðe
út. Þá sende hann till salt-goerðar í Svefn-eyjar. Þar haofðo þeir
Hallsteins þrælar hagfarm. [332]15

Hallsteinn átte Oscu dóttor Þorsteins Rauðs. Þeirra son vas
Þórsteinn es fann sumar-auka. Þorsteinn Surtr átte ... Þeirra son
vas Þórarenn, en dótter Þórdís, es átte Þórkell Trefill; ok Osc
es átte Steinn Miok-siglande; Þórsteinn Hvíte hét son þeirra. Sámr
[[132: ii. 24.]] hét son Þorsteins Surtz óskil-getenn; hann deilðe
um arf Þorsteins við Trefil, þvi at hann vilde halda í hendr baornom
Þórarens. [333]

2. Þorbiaorn Loke hét maðr, son Baoðmóðs or Skut; hann fór til Íslannz
ok nam Diúpa-fiaorð, ok Gró-nes til Gufu-fiarðar. Hans son vas Þórgils
á Þórgils-staoðom í Diúpa-firðe, faðer Collz es átte5 Þóríðe Þóris
dóttor, Hallaðar sonar iarls, Rognvallz sonar iarls. [334] Þórgils son
þeirra átte Otkotlo, dóttor Iaorundar, Atla sonar ens Rauða; þeirra son
vas Iaorundr; hann átte Hallveigo, dóttor Oddz, Ýrar sonar ok Cetils
Gufo. Snorre vas Iaorundar son, es átte Ásnýjo, dóttor Víga-Sturlo;
þeirra son vas Gils, es átte Þórdíse10 Goðlaugs dóttor, ok dóttor [335]
Þórkaotlo, Halldórs dóttor, Snorra sonar Goða. En son Gils vas Þórðr
[336], es átte Vígdíse Svertings dóttor [þeirra son var Hvamm-Sturla].

3. Cetill Gufa hét maðr, son OErlygs, Baoðvars sonar, Vígsterks sonar;
OErlygr átte Signýjo, Óblauðs dóttor, systor Haogna ens15 Hvíta. Cetill
son þeirra kom út síð land-náma-tíðar: hann hafðe veret í vestr-víking,
ok haft af Írlande þræla Írska: hét einn Þor­modr, annarr Flóke,
Core, ok Svartr, ok Scorar tveir. Cetill tók Rosmhvala-nes; sat hann
þar enn fyrsta vetr at Gufu-skaólom. En um váret fór hann inn á Nes,
ok sat at Gufo-nese annan vettr.20

[[133: ii. 24.]] Þá hliópo þeir Skore enn ellre ok Flóke á braut með
konor tvær ok fé mikit; þeir vóro á laun í Skorra-holte; en þeir vóro
drepner í Flóka-dale ok Skora-dale.

4. Cetill feck oengan bú-stað á Nesjom, ok fór þaðan inn í
Borgar-fiaorð; ok sat enn þriðja vetr á Gufu-skaólom við Guf-aó: enn5
fiórða vettr vas hann á Snæfellz-nese [337] at Gufu-skaólom. Snemma
um váret fór hann inn í Breiða-fiaorð at leita ser at bústað. Þá vas
hann í Geirmundar-staoðom, ok bað Ýrar dóttor Geirmundar, ok feck
hennar. Vísaðe Geirmundr þá Catle til landa fyr vestan fiaorð.10

5. Þrælar Cetils Gufu hliópo braut af Snæfellz-nese, ok kvómo [338]
fram um nótt á Lamba-staoðom: þar bió þá Þórðr, son Þórgeirs Lamba
ok Þórdísar Yngvars dóttor systor Egils Skalla-Gríms sonar. [339]
Þrælarner baóro þar eld at húsom, ok brendo Þórð inne ok hiún
hans aoll. Þeir bruto upp goerve-búr, ok tóko vaoro mikla ok
lausa-fé. [340]15 Síðan raóko þeir heim hesta ok klyfjoðo [341]
ok snoero á leið til Alfta-ness. Lambe enn Sterke, son Þórðar,
kom af þinge um morgonenn þá es þeir vóro ný-farner braut; hann
fór efter þeim ok menn með hónom.  En es þrælarner siá þat, hlióp
sínn veg hverr þeirra. Þeir tóko Cora í Cora-nese; en sumer gengo á
sund. Svart tóko20 þetr í Svartz-skere; en Scora í Scor-ey; en Þormod
í Þormods-skere--þat es vika undan lande.

[[135: ii. 25.]] 6. Cetill Gufa nam Gufu-fiaorð, ok Skála-nes til
Colla-fiarðar. Cetill ok Yre aótto tvá sono: vas Þórhallr annarr, faðer
Hallvarar, es átte Baorkr son Þórmóðar Þióstars sonar [342]. Odde
[343] vas [annarr] son þeirra Cetils ok Ýrar, es átte Þórlaugo,
Hrólfs dóttor frá Ballara-aó ok Þóríðar dóttor Valþiófs, OErlygs
sonar frá Esjo-berge.5

7. Hof-Colle Hroallz son nam Colla-fiaorð ok Cvíganda-nes [344], ok
Cvígandis-fiaorð, ok selde ymsom maonnom land-nám sítt; en hann fór í
Laxár-dal á Haoscullz-staðe. Hann vas kallaðr Dala-Collr. Hans son vas
Haosculldr es átte Hallfríðe, dóttor Biarnar, es nam10 Biarnar-fiaorð
fyr norðan Steingríms-fiaorð. Þeirra son vas Þórleikr [345], faðer
Bolla es átte Goðrúno Osvifrs dóttor.

8. Cniúcr, son Þórolfs Sparrar, es kallaðr vas Nesja-Cniúcr [346]; hann
nam nes aoll til Barða-strandar frá Cvíganda-firðe, ok bió.... [347]
Hann átte Eyjo, dóttor Ingiallz, Helga sonar ens Magra; þeirra15 baorn,
Einarr, faðer Steinolfs Birtings, faoðor Salgerðar, móðor Bárðar
ens Svarta; ok Eyjolfr, es vas stiúp-faðer Þórbiargar Col­brúnar,
Glúms dóttor, es Þormóðr orte um. Þórgrímr vas ok Eyjolfs son, faðer
Yngvilldar es átte Ulfheðinn á Víðe-mýre; ok Þóra móðer Mýra-Cniúcz í
Dýra-firðe. Hann vas faðer Þórgautz,20 faoðor Steinolfs, faoðor Þorkels
[f. Haollo, m. Steinunnar, m. Hrafns [[136: i. 25.]] Sveinbiarnar
sonar, ok Herdísar, es átte Hallr Gizorar s. Logmaðr] [348].

[S: Annarr son Cniúcs vas Einarr, faðer Steinolfs, faoðor Salgerðar,
móðor Bárðar Svarta. Þóra hét dótter Cniúcs, es átte Þórvaldr, son
Þórðar Víkings sonar. Þeirra son vas Mýra-Cniúcr,5 faðer Þórgautz,
faoðor Steinolfs [f. Haollo, m. Steinunnar, m. Hrafns á Eyre]. Cniúcr
átte Eviu [349], dóttor Ingiallz, Helga sonar Magra. Þeirra son var
Eyjolfr, faðer Þórgríms Kotlo sonar. Glúmr átte fyrr Kotlo, ok var
þeirra dótter Þórbiaorg Colbrún es Þormóðr orte um. Steingrímr hét
son Þórgríms, faðer Yngvildar, es átte Ulf­heðinn10 á Viðe-mýre.]

9. Geirsteinn Cialke nam Cialka-fiaorð ok Hiarðar-nes með ráðe
Cniúcs; hans son vas Þórgils, faðer Steins ens Danska [f. Vígdísar,
m. Þórunnar, m. Þórgeirs, f. Þorfinnz ábóta].

[S: Hans son vas Þórgils es átte Þóro, dóttor Vestars af Eyre;15
þeirra son Steinn enn Danske; hann átte Hallgerðe Ornolfs dóttor,
Arnmóðs-sonar ens Rauða: Ornolfr átte Vígdíse, dóttor (blank). Vígdís
hét dótter Steins ens Danska, ok Hallgerðar es átte Illoge Steinbiarnar
son. Þeirra dótter vas Þórunn, móðer Þorgeirs Lang-haofða.]20

[[137: ii. 25.]] 21. 1. Geirleifr, son Eiriks, Haogna sonar ens Hvíta,
nam Barða-straond miðle Vatz-fiarðar ok Berg-hlíða. Hann vas faðer
þeirra Oddleifs ok Helga Skarfs. Oddleifr vas faðer Gestz ens Spaka,
ok Þórsteins, ok Æso, es átte Þórgils, son Gríms í Gríms-nese; þeirra
syner vóro þeir Iaorundr í Mið-enge,5 ok Þórarenn at Búrfelle. [350]
Baorn Gestz vóro þau Þórðr, ok Halla, es Snorre Dala-Alfs son átte;
Þórgils vas son þeirra. Onnor dótter Gestz vas Þórey, es Þórgils
átte; Þórarenn vas son þeirra, faðer Iódísar, móðor Illoga, faoðor
Birno, móðor Arnórs ok [351] Eyvindar. Geirleifr átte Ióro, dóttor
Helga. Þórfiðr hét þriðe son Geirleifs;10 hann átte Goðrúno Ásolfs
dóttor. Þórsteinn Oddleifs son vas faðer Ísgerðar, es átte Baolverkr,
sonr Eyjolfs ens Grá; þeirra son Geller Laog(sogo)-maðr. Véný vas enn
dótter Þórsteins, móðer Þórðar Kráko-nefs. Þaðan ero Krákneflingar
komner. [352]

[S: (Arnórs ok Eyvindar.) Helge Skrápr [skarfr] vas faðer15 Þórbiargar,
móðor Kotlo es átte Þórsteinn Solmundar son; þeirra syner, Refr í
Brynjo-dale, ok Þórðr, faðer Illoga, faoðor Hroð-nýjar es Þórgrímr
Sviðe átte. Þórdís hét aonnor dótter Helga Skraps [353], es átte
Þórsteinn Ásbiarnar son or Kirkjo-boe austan. Þeirra son vas Surtr,
faðer Sigvatz Laogsaogo-mannz. Geirleifr20 [[138: ii. 26.]] átte
Ióro Helga dóttor. Þórfinnr hét enn þriðe son Geirleifs; hann átte
Goðrúno Ásolfs dóttor. Ásmundr hét son þeirra; hann átte Hallkaotlo,
dóttor Biarnar, Mars sonar, Ásmundar sonar; Hlenne hét son þeirra;
hann átte Ægi-leifu [354], dóttor Þórsteins Croflo­sonar; Þórfiðr vas
son þeirra, faðer Þórgeirs Lang-haofða. Þórsteinn5 Oddleifsson, &c.]

2. Gróa en Cristna vas dótter Geirleifs, móðer Helga, faoðor Ósvifrs,
faoðor Goðrúnar, móðor Bolla, faoðor Herdísar, móðor Coðrans. [355]

3. Arnmóðr enn Rauðe, Þórbiarnar son, fóstr-bróðer [356] Geirleifs,10
nam Rauða-sand. Hans syner vóro þeir Ornolfr, ok Þórbiaorn, faðer
Hrólfs ens Rauð-senzka.

4. Þórolfr Spaorr kom út með OErlyge, ok nam Patrecs-fiaorð fyr
vestan, ok Víkr fyr vestan Barð; nema Collz-vík: þar bió Collr
fóst-bróðer OErlygs.  Þórolfr nam Kefla-vík fyr sunnan15 Barð, ok
bió at Hval-laotrom. [357] Þeir Nesja-Cniúcr ok Ingolfr enn Sterke,
ok Geirþiófr vóro syner Þórolfs Sparrar. Þórarna vas dótter Ingolfs,
es Þórsteinn Oddleifs son átte.

5. Þórbiaorn Talcne ok Þórbiaorn Scúma, syner Baoðvars [358]
Bloðro-skalla, kómo út með OErlyge. Þeir naómo Patrecs-fiaorð halfan,20
ok Talcna-fiaorð allan til Kópa-ness.

6. Cetill Il-breiðr, son Þórbiarnar Talcna, nam Dala alla frá [[139:
ii. 26.]] Kópa-nese til Dufans-dals. Hann gaf Þóraorno dóttor sína
Her­gilse Hnappraz: rézk Cetill þá suðr í Breiða-fiaorð, ok nam
Bero­fiaord hiá Reykja-nese.


22. 1. Orn hét maðr ágætr, hann vas frænde Geirmundar
Heljar-skinnz. [359] Hann fór af Roga-lande fyr ofríke5 Harallz
konungs. Hann nam Arnar-fiaorð allan. [360] Hann sat um vetrenn á
Tialda-nese; þvi at þar geck eige sól af um skamm­dege.

2. Ánn Rauðfeldr, son Gríms Loðin-kinna or Hrafnisto, ok sonr Helgo,
dóttor Ánar Bog-sveigiss, varð mis-sáttr við Harald10 konung;
ok fór því ór lande í vestr-víking. Hann herjaðe [361] á Írland,
ok feck þar Greladar, dóttor Biartmars iarls. Þau fóro til Íslannz,
ok kómo í Arnar-fiaorð vettre síðarr an Orn. Orn vas enn fyrsta vettr
í Dufans-dale; þar þótte Grelodo ílla ilma or iaorðo. Orn spurðe
til Hámundar Heljar-skinnz norðr í Eyja-firðe, frænda síns,15 ok
fýstesk hann þangat. [362] Því selde hann Áne Rauðfelld laond aoll
miðle Langa-ness ok Stapa. Hann goerðe bú á Eyre; þar þótte Grelodo
hunangs-ilmr or grase.

3. Dufane þræle sínom gaf Án Dufans-dal. [363] Biartmár vas son
Ánar, faðer Végesta tveggja, ok Helga, foðor Þóríðar, móðor [364]
Arnkotlo,20 [[141: ii. 26.]] es átte Helge Eyþjófs son. [365] Þórhildr
vas dótter Biartmárs, es átte Vésteinn Végeirs son. Auðr ok Vésteinn
vóro baorn þeirra.

4. Hiallcar vas leysinge Ánar; hans sonr vas Biaorn þræll
Biartmárs. Hann gaf Birne frelse: þá groedde hann fé. Végestr vandaðe
um, ok lagðe hann spióte í goegnom; en Biaorn laust5 hann með grefe
til bana.

5. Geirþiófr Valþiófs son nam enn land í Arnar-firðe, Fors-fiaorð,
Reykjar-fiaorð, Trostans-fiaorð, Geirþiófs-fiaorð, ok allt til
Langa-ness, ok bió í Geirþiófs-firðe. Hann átte Salgerðe [366], dóttor
Ulfs ens Skiálga; þeirra son Haogne, faðer Atla, faoðor Haoscullz,
faoðor10 Atla, faoðor Bárðar Svarta [f. Sveinbiarnar, f. Hrafns,
f. Steinunnar, m. Herra Rafns].

[S: (Þeirra son Haogne.) Hann átte Auðe, dóttor Óláfs Iafna-collz
ok Þóro Gunnsteins dóttor. Atle vas son þeirra; hann átte Þóríðe,
Þórleifs dóttor, Eyvindar sonar Cnés ok Þóríðar Rúm-gyltu.15 Þórleifr
átte Gró, dóttor Þórolfs Brækis. Haosculldr vas son Atla, faðer Bárðar
ens Svarta.]

6. Eirekr hét maðr, es nam Keldo-dal fyr sunnan Dýra-fiaorð,
ok Slétta-nes til Stapa í Arnar-firðe; en til Hals ens ýtra í
Dýra-firðe. Hann vas faðer Þórkels, faoðor Þórðar, faoðor Þorkels,
faoðor20 Steinolfs, faoðor Þórðar [f. Þórleifar, m. Þóru, m. Guðmundar
Gríss, er átte Solveigo dóttor Ións Loptz sonar. Þeirra born vóro,
[[142: ii. 27.]] Magnus Goðe, ok Þorlákr f. Arna byscops, ok Þóra
m. Gizorar iarls]. [367]

[S: (Gudmundar Gríss.) Þórleif var m. Liny, m. Ceciliu, m. Bárðar ok
Þórgerðar er átte Biorn enn Enske. Þeirra born vóro þau Arnis ábóte
ok Þóra er átte Ámunde Þórgeirs son.]5

7. Vésteinn, son Végeirs, bróðer Vébiarnar Sygna-kappa, nam land miðle
halsa í Dýra-firðe ok bió í Hauka-dale; hann átte Þórhilde Biartmárs
dóttor. Þeirra baorn Vésteinn ok Auðr. [368]

8. Þórbiaorn Súrr kom út at albygðo lande; hónom gaf Vésteinn halfan
Hauka-dal. Hans baorn vóro þau Gísle [369], es átte Auðe Vésteins10
dóttor; ok Þorkell, es átte Sígríðe Sleito-Biarnar dóttor; ok Þórdís,
es átte Þórgrímr Þorsteins son: þeirra son Snorre Goðe. Síðan átte
Þórdíse Borkr enn Digre; þeirra dótter Þórríðr, es átte Þórbiaorn
Digre, en síðarr Þóroddr Skatt-kaupande: þeirra son vas Ceartan at
Fróð-aó. [370]15


23. 1. Dýre hét maðr ágætr [371] es fór af Sunn-moere til Íslannz, at
ráðe Raognvallz iarls. Hann nam Dýra-fiaorð, ok bió at Halsom. Hans
son vas Hrafn, es bió á Cetils-eyre, faðer Þóríðar es átte Vésteinn
Vésteins son; þeirra syner Bergr ok Helge.20

2. Þórðr hét maðr Víkings son [372], es flester kalla veret hafa son
[[143: ii. 27.]] Harallz konungs Hárfagra. Hónom gaf Dýre land miðle
á Þúfo á Hialla-nese, ok Iarð-fallz-gils; ok bió í Alviðru. Hann
átte Þióðhilde, dóttor Eyvindar Austmannz [373], systor Helga (ens)
Magra. Þeirra son vas Þórkell Kappe enn Auðge, es þar bió síðan
[374]. Hans son vas Þórðr Orvond; ok Eyjolfr, faðer Gísla es átte
Hallgerðe,5 dóttor Vermundar ens Mióva; þeirra son Brandr, faðer
Goðmundar prestz í Hiarðar-holte, faoðor Magnus prestz, en dótter
Þóra, es átte Brandr Þórhaddz son. Þeirra baorn [375], Steinvaor,
móðer Rannveigar; móðor Sæhildar es Gizorr [byscop] átte. Helge
hét annarr son Eyjolfs; hans baorn vóro þau Óláfr, ok Goðlaug es10
Firska-Fiðr átte [376]. Þórvaldr Hvíte hét annarr son Þórðar Víkings
sonar; hann átte Þóro Cniúcs dóttor [377]. Þeirra son Þórðr Hvíte eða
Orvond es átte Ásdíse Þormoðs dóttor, móðor Ulfs Stallara. Dótter
Þórðar Orvandar (vas) Oddkatla [378], es átte Sturla Þióðreks son;
þeirra son Þórðr, es átte Hallbero, dóttor Snorra Goða. Ásný vas15
dótter Sturlo, es Snorre Iorundar son átte. [Þeirra dótter Þórdís,
m. Hoscullz lækniss, f. Margretar, m. Þorfinnz Ábóta.]

[S: (Þóro d. Nesja-Cniucs.) Þeirra son vas Mýra-Cniúcr, faðer Þórgautz,
faoðor Steinolfs, es átte Herdíse Tinnz dóttor; þeirra [[144:
ii. 28.]] baorn vóro þau Þorkell á Mýrom, ok Halla es átte Þórðr
Oddleifs son. Annarr son Þórvallz Hvíta vas Þórðr oruondr, es átte
Ásdíse, Þórgríms dóttor Harðrefs sonar. Móðer Ásdísar vas Rannveig,
dótter Griótgarðar Hlaða-iarls. Ásdís vas móðer Ulfs Stallara, en
syster Liótz ens Spaka, ok Halldísar es Þórbiaorn Þióðreks son átte.5
Dótter þeirra Þórðar Orvandar vas Ottkatla, es átte Sturla Þióðreks
son: þeirra son Þórðr, es átte Hallbero, dóttor Snorra Goða: þeirra
dótter Þóríðr, es átte Hafliðe Márs son. Snorre vas son Þórðar Sturlo
sonar, es átte Oddbiaorgo, dótter Gríms Loðmundar sonar: þeirra baorn
vóro þau Flugo-Grímr ok Hallbera, es Mág-Snorre10 átte. Doetr Sturlo
vóro sex; ein vas Asný, es Snorre Iaorundar son átte; þeirra dótter
Þórdís, móðer Hoscullz læknis. Son þeirra Snorra ok Ásnýjar vas Gils,
faðer Þórðar [faoðor Sturlo í Hvamme].]

3. Ingialldr Brúna son nam Ingiallz-sand, á miðle Hialla-ness15 ok
Úfoero [379]. Hann vas faðer Harðrefs, faoðor Þórgríms, faoðor þeirra
Liótz, sem áðr vas ritið.


24.  [380]1. Liótr enn Spake bió at Ingiallz-sande, son Þórgríms
Harðrefs sonar; en móðer hans vas Rannveig, dóttor Griótgarðar
iarls. Þórgrímr Gagarr vas son Liótz. Hall-díse,20 systor Liótz, átte
Þórbiaorn Þióðreks son; en Ásdíse, aðra [[145: ii. 28.]] systor Liótz,
nam Óspakr Osvifs son. Um þá saok sótte Liótr Óspak til sekðar. Ulfr
hét son þeirra: þann foedde Liótr.

2. Grímr Kaogor bió á Brecko: hans syner vóro þeir Sigurðr ok Þorkell,
lítler menn ok smáer. Þórarenn hét fóstr-son Liótz. Liótr kauper
slátr at Gríme til tottogo hundraða, ok galt veite-enge,5 es hét
Gersoeme. Loekr fell meðal landa þeirra: Grímr veitte hónom á eng sína,
ok gróf land Liótz; en hann gaf saok á því; ok vas fátt með þeim. [381]

Liótr tók við Austmanne í Vaðle; sá lagðe hug á Ásdíse. Gestr Oddleifs
son sótte haust-boð til Liótz. Þá kom þar Egill Volo-Steins10
son, ok bað Gest, at hann legðe ráð til at faoðor hans boettesk
hel-stríð, es hann bar um Ogmund son sínn. Gestr orte upphaf at
[382] Ogmundar-draópo.

Liótr spurðe Gest, hvat manna Þórgrímr Gagarr monde verða. Gestr kvað
Þórarenn fóstra hans frægra [383] mondo verða; ok bað15 Þórarenn
við siá, at eige vefðesk hár þat um haofot hónom es lá á tungo
hans. Óvirðing þótte Lióte þetta; ok spurðe um morgonenn hvat fyr
Þórgríme læge. Gestr kvað Ulf systor son hans mondo frægra verða. Þá
varð Liótr reiðr, ok reið þó á leið með Geste; ok spurðe: 'Hvat mon mer
at bana verða?' Gestr kvezk20 [[146: ii. 28.]] eige siá oerlaog hans;
en bað hann vesa vel við nábua sína. Liótr spurðe: 'Mono iarð-lýsnar,
syner Gríms Kaogors, verða mer at bana?' 'Sárt bítr solten lús,'
kvað Gestr. 'Hvar mon þat verða?' kvað Liótr. 'Heðra nær,' kvað Gestr.

Austmaðr reidde Gest á heiðe upp, ok studde Gest á bake, es5 hestr
rasaðe under hónom. Þá mælte Gestr: 'Happ sótte þik nú; en brátt
mon annat. Gættú, at þer verðe þat eige at óhappe.' Austmaðr enn
fann graf-silfr; en [384] hann fór heim ok tók af tottogo pennínga,
ok ætlaðe, at hann moende feta til síðarr; en es hann leitaðe,
fann hann eige. En Liótr feck teket hann es hann vas at10 grefte;
ok goerðe af hónom þriú hundrað fyr hvern penning.

Þat haust vas vegenn Þórbiaorn Þióðreks son.

Um várit sat Liótr at þrælom sínom á hæð einne; hann vas í kaópo, ok
vas haottrenn lerkaðr um halsenn, ok ein ermr á. Þeir Kaogors-syner
hliópo á hæðena, ok hioggo til hans báðer senn.15 Efter þat snaraðe
Þorkell haottenn at haofðe [385] hónom. Liótr kvað þá láta lítt í
bú-sifjom sínom; ok hraopoðo þeir af hæðenne á gaoto þá es Gestr hafðe
riðet. Þar dó Liótr. Þeir Gríms-syner fóro til Hávarðar Hallta. Eyjolfr
Gráe veitte þeim aollom, ok Steingrímr son hans.20

[[147: ii. 29.]]

3. Hallvarðr Súgande vas í orrosto á móte Haralde konunge í
Hafrs-firðe. Hann fór af Sætrom af Haorða-lande til Íslannz, ok nam
Súganda-fiaorð ok Skála-vík til Stiga [386], ok bió þar.

4.  [387]Onundr Víkings son, bróðer Þórðar í Alviðro, nam
Onundar-fiaorð allan, ok bió á Eyre.5

5. Þórríðr Sunda-fyller, ok Volo-Steinn son hennar, fóro af
Háloga-lande til Íslannz, ok naómo Bulungar-vík, ok bioggo í
Vatz-nese. Hon vas því kaolloð Sunda-fyller, at hon seið [388] til
þess í hallære á Háloga-lande, at hvert sund vas fullt af sílð [389];
hon sette ok Kviar-mið á Ísafiarðar-diúpe, ok tók til aó kollótta
af10 hverjom boanda í Ísa-firðe. Syner Volo-Steins vóro þeir Ogmundr
ok Egill.

6. Helge hét son Hrólfs or Gnúpo-felle [390], ok vas Upplenzkr at móðor
ætt, ok vóx þar upp. Hann fór til Íslannz at vilja frænda sinna. Hann
kom í Eyja-fiaorð, ok vas þar þá al-bygt. Efter þat15 vill hann útan,
ok varð aftr-reka í Súganda-fiaorð. Hann vas of vetr með Hallvarðe;
en of váret fór hann at leita ser bústaðar; hann fann fiaorð, ok
hitte þar skutel í floeðar-mále. Þar kallaðe [[148: ii. 29.]] hann
Skutils-fiaorð. Þar bygðe hann síðan. Hans son vas Þórsteinn Úgæfa;
hann fór útan, ok vá hirð-mann Hákonar iarls Griótgarðz sonar;
en Eyvindr ráðgiafe iarls sende hann til Vébiarnar Sygna-trausta;
hann tók við hónom; en Védís syster hans latte þess. Fyrer þat selðe
Vébiaorn eigner sínar, ok fór til5 Íslannz, es hann treystisk eige
at halda mannenn [391].

7. Þórolfr Bræker nam suman Skutils-fiaorð, ok Skála-vík, ok bió þar.

8. Eyvindr [392] Cné fór af Ogðom til Íslannz, ok Þórríðr Rúm-gylta
kona hans. Þau naómo Alfta-fiaorð, ok Seyðis-fiaorð, ok bioggo10
þar. Þeirra son Þórleifr, es fyrr vas geteð; ok Valbrandr, faðer
Hallgríms [393], ok Gunnars, ok Biargeyjar [394] es átte Hávarðr Halte:
þeirra son vas Óláfr.


25. 1. Geirr hét maðr ágætr í Sogne. Hann vas kallaðr Vé-Geirr;
þvi at hann vas blót-maðr mikill. Hann15 átte maorg baorn: Vébiaorn
[395] Sygna-kappe vas ellztr sona hans; en Vésteinn, ok Véþormr, ok
Vémundr, ok Végestr, Veþaorn, en Védís dótter. Efter andlát Végeirs
varð Vébiaorn ósáttr við Hákon iarl, sem fyrr vas getið; því fóro
[396] þau systkin til Íslannz. Þau haofðo úte-vist harða ok langa:
þau tóko um haust Hlaoðo-vík20 fyr vestan Horn. Þá feck Vébiaorn at
blóte miklo; ok kvað Hákon iarl blóta þann dag þeim til úþurftar. En
es hann vas at blóteno, eggjoðo broeðr hans hann til braut-farar,
ok gaóðo þeir eige [[149: ii. 29.]] blótzens; ok léto þeir út. Þeir
bruto enn sama dag skip sítt under haomrom miklom í ill-viðre. Þar
kómosk þau nauðoliga upp, ok geck Vébiaorn fyrir. Þat es nú kaolloð
Sygna-kleif. En um vetrenn tók við þeim aollom Atle í Flióte [397],
þræll Geirmundar Heljar-skinnz, ok bað þau oengo launa vistena;
sagðe Geirmund5 eige vanta mat. En es Atle fann Geirmund, spurðe
Geirmundr, hví hann vas svá diarfr, at taka slíka menn upp á kost
hans. Atle svaraðe: 'Því at þat man uppe meðan Ísland es byggt, hverso
mikils-háttar sá maðr moende vesa, at einn þræll þorðe at goera slíkt
útan hans orlofs.' Geirmundr svarar: 'Fyrer þetta þítt við-toeke10
skaltú þiggja frelse, ok bú þetta, es þú hefer varð-veitt.' Ok varð
Atle síðan mikil-menne.

2. Vébiaorn nam um váret land miðle Skoto-fiarðar ok Hest-fiarðar,
svá vítt sem hann genge [398] um á dag; ok því meirr sem kallaðr
es Fola-fótr.15

Vébiaorn vas víga-maðr mikill; ok es saga mikil frá hónom. Hann gaf
Védíse, systor sína, Grímolfe í Unaðs-dale: þeir urðo mis-sátter,
ok vá Vébiaorn hann hiá Grímolfs-vaotnom. Fyrer þat vas Vébiaorn
vegenn á Þingeyrar-þinge í Dýra-firðe [399], ok þrír menn aðrer.20

[[150: ii. 30.]]

26. 1. Gunnsteinn ok Halldórr héto syner Gunnbiarnar,
es Gunnbiarnar-sker 'ro við kend. Gunnbiaorn vas son Ulfs
Kraóko. Þeir naómo Skoto-fiaorð, ok Laugar-dal, ok Ogurs-vík
[400] til Mióva-fiarðar. Berse vas son Halldórs, faðer Þórmóðar
Colbrúnar-skallz. Þar í Laugar-dale bió síðan Þórbiaorn Þióðreks5 son,
es vá Óláf, son Hávarðar Halta ok Biargeyjar Valbranz-dóttor.--Þar
af goerðesk Saga Ísfirðinga, ok víg Þórbiarnar.

2. Snæbiaorn, son Eyvindar Austmannz, bróðer Helga Magra, nam land
miðle Mióva-fiarðar ok Langa-dals-ár, ok bió í Vatz-firðe. Hans son vas
Holmsteinn, faðer Snæbiarnar Gallta, es vá10 Hallbiaorn, son Oddz at
Kiðja-berge, hiá Hallbiarnar-vaorðom. Hann hafðe áðr veget Hallgerðe
kono sína, dóttor Tungo-Oddz. Móðer Snæbiarnar Galltar vas Ceolvor,
ok vóro þeir Tungo-Oddr systra-syner. Snæbiaorn vas fóstraðr í Þingnese
með Þórodde, en stundom vas hann með Tungo-Odde eða móðor sínne.15

3. Hallbiaorn, son Oddz frá Kiðja-berge, Hallkels sonar, bróðor
Ketilbiarnar ens Gamla, feck Hallgerðar, dóttor Tungo-Oddz. Þau vóro
með Odde enn fyrsta vetr. Þá vas Snæbiaorn Gallte þar. Óástugt vas með
þeim hiónom. Hallbiaorn bió ferð sína um váret at Far-daogom. En es
hann vas í búnaðe, fór Oddr frá húse til20 laugar í Reykja-holt.--Þar
vóro sauða-hús hans--ok vilde hann [[151: ii. 30.]] eige vesa við es
Hallbiaorn foere; þvi at hann grunaðe, at Hallgerðr moende eige fara
vilja með hónom. Oddr hafðe iamnan um boett með þeim. Þá es Hallbiaorn
hafðe lagt á hesta þeirra, geck hann í dyngjo; ok sat Hallgerðr á
palle, ok kembðe ser; háret fell um hána alla ok á golfet.--Hon
hefer kvenna bazt hærð vereð á5 Íslande með Hallgerðe Lang-brók
[401]. Hallbiaorn bað hána upp standa ok fara; hón sat ok þagðe. Þá
tók hann til hennar, ok lyptisk hon ecke [402]. Þrimr sinnom fór
svá. Hallbiaorn nam stað fyrer henne ok kvað:



    Olkarma lætr arman, eik, etc.10



Hann snaraðe háret of haond ser, ok vill kippa henne af pallenom;
en hón sat ok veiksk eige efter. Þá brá hann sverðe, ok hió af
henne haofoðet. Síðan geck hann út, ok reið braut. Þeir vóro
fiórer [403] saman, ok haofðo tvau klyfja-hross. Fátt vas manna
heima. Þegar vas sent at segja Odde. Oddr seger: 'Segið ér Snæbirne á
Ceol-varar-staoðom;15 en ecke mon ek efter þeim ríða.' Snæbiaorn reið
efter þeim með tolfta mann. En es þeir Hallbiaorn siá efter-reið,
baóðo faoro-nautar Hallbiarnar hann undan ríða; en hann vilde þat
eige. Þeir Snæbiaorn kómo efter þeim við hæðer þær, es nú heita
Hallbiarnar-vaorðor. Þeir Hallbiaorn fóro á hæðena ok vaorðosk20
þaðan. Þar fello þrír [404] menn af Snæbirne, en báðer faoro-nautar
Hallbiarnar. Snæbiaorn hió þá fót af Hallbirne í ristar-lið; þá [[153:
ii. 30.]] hnekðe hann á ena syðre hæð, ok vá þar enn tvá menn áðr hann
fell--því ero þriár vaorðor á þeirre hæð, en fimm á hinne. Síðan fór
Snæbiaorn aptr. [405]

4. ...Snæbiaorn átte skip í Grímsár-óse; ok keypte halft, Hrólfr enn
Rauðsenzke: þeir vóro tolf hvárir. Með Snæbirne vóro5 þeir Þorkell (ok)
Sumarliðe syner Þórgeirs Rauðs, Einars sonar Stafhyltings. Snæbiaorn
tók við Þórodde or Þingnese, fóstra sínom, ok kono hans; en Hrólfr
tók við Styrbirne, es þetta kvað efter draum sínn:


    Bana sé-ek ockarn, beggja tveggja,10
    Allt amorlegt út-norðr í haf:
    Frost ok kulða, feikn hvers-konar,
    Siaómk af svikom [406] Snæbiaorn vegenn.


Þeir fóro at leita Gunnbiarnar-skerja, ok fundo land. Eige vilde
Snæbiaorn kanna láta um nóttena. Styrbiaorn fór af skipe, ok fann15
fé-sióð í kumble, ok leynðe. Snæbiaorn laust hann með oexe; þá fell
sióðrenn niðr. Þeir goerðo skála, ok lagðe hann í faonn. Þorkell Rauðs
son fann at vatn vas á forke es út stóð í skála-gluggenn. Þat vas um
Goe [407]. Þá grófo þeir sik út. Snæbiaorn goerðe [[154: ii. 31.]] at
skipe; en þau Þóroddr vóro at skála af hans hende; en þeir Styrbiaorn
af hende Hrólfs [408]; en aðrer fóro at veiðom. Styrbiaorn vá Þórodd;
en þeir Hrólfr báðer Snæbiaorn. Rauðs-syner ok aller aðrer sóro eiða
til lífs sér.

Þeir tóko Háloga-land, ok fóro þaðan til Íslannz, ok kómo í5
Vaðel. Þorkell Trefill gat sem faret hafðe fyrer Rauðs-sonom. Hrólfr
goerðe virke á Strandar-heiðe. Þorkell Trefill sende Sveinung til
haofuðs Hrólfe: fór hann fyrst á Mýre til Her­mundar; þá til Óláfs
at Draongom; þá til Gestz í Haga; hann sende hann til Hrólfs vinar
síns. Sveinungr vá Hrólf ok Styr­biaorn:10 þá fór hann í Haga. Gestr
skifte við hann sverðe ok oexe, ok feck hónom hesta tvá, hnockótta
[409], ok lét mann ríða um Vaðel, ok allt í Kolla-fiaorð: hann sende
Þorbiaorn enn Sterka at heimta hestana; Þórbiaorn [410] vá hann á
Sveinungs-eyre, því at sverðet Sveinungs brotnaðe under hiaoltonom. Því
hoeldesk Trefill við Gest, þá15 es saman vas iamnat vite þeirra, at
hann hefðe því komet á Gest, at hann sende sialfr mann til haofuðs
vin sínom.

5. Óláfr Iamna-collr nam land frá Langa-dals-aó til Sandeyrar-ár,
ok bió í Unaðs-dale; hann átte Þóríðe [411] Gunnsteins dóttor: þeirra
son Grímolfr, es átte Védíse, systor Vébiarnar [412].20

6. Þórolfr [413] Fasthalde hét maðr ágætr í Sogne. Hann varð úsáttr
[[156: ii. 31]] við Hákon iarl Griótgarðz son, ok fór hann til
Íslannz [414]; ok nam hann land frá Sandeyrar-aó til Gygjar-spors-ár
í Hrafns-firðe, ok bió at Snæfiaollom. Hans son vas Ufeigr, faðer
[415] Otkotlo.


27. 1. OErlygr, son Baoðvars Vígsterks (sonar); hann fór til Íslannz
fyr ofríke Harallz konungs Hárfagra, ok5 vas enn fyrsta vetr með
Geirmunde Heljar-skinn. En um váret gaf Geirmundr hónom bústað í
Aðal-vík, ok laond þau sem þar laógo til. OErlygr átte Signýjo, dóttor
Óblauðs, systor [416] Haogna ens Hvíta: þeirra son vas Cetill Gufa es
átte Yre Geirmundar dóttor. OErlygr eignaðesk Slétto ok Iokul-fiorðo.10

2. Nú taka til land-naóm Geirmundar [417] [es nú ero almenningar],
sem fyrr es ritað, allt til Straum-ness fyr austan Horn.


28. 1. Hella-biorn, son Herfinnz ok Haollo, vas víkingr mikill: hann
vas iamnan úvin Harallz konungs. Hann kom til Íslannz í Biarnar-fiaorð
með alskiaoldoðo skipe--síðan15 vas hann Skialda-Biaorn kallaðr. Hann
nam land frá Straum-nese til Dranga: hann bió í Skialda-Biarnar-vík;
en átte annat bú í Biarnar-nese--þar sér miklar skála-tofter hans.--Son
hans vas Þórbiaorn, faðer Arngerðar, es átte Þióðrekr Sleito-Biarnar
son. Þeirra syner Þórbiaorn, ok Sturla, ok Þióðrekr.20

[[157: ii. 32.]]

2. Geirolfr hét maðr, es braut skip sítt við Geirolfs-gnúp: hann bió
síðan under gnúpenom at ráðe Biarnar.

3.  [418]Þórvaldr Ásvallz son, Ulfs son, Yxna-Þóris sonar nam
Dranga-land ok Dranga-vík til Engi-ness, ok bió at Draongom alla
æve. Hans son vas Eirikr Rauðe, es bygðe Groena-land, sem fyrr5 seger.

4. Herroeðr Hvika-timbr [419] vas gaofogr maðr; hann vas drepenn at
raóðom Harallz konungs. En syner hans þrír fóro til Íslannz, ok naómo
land á Straondom: Eyvindr Eyvindar-fiaorð. Ófeigr Ófeigs-fiaorð,
en Ingolfr Ingolfs-fiaorð. Þar bioggo þeir síðan.10

5. Eirikr Snara hét maðr, es land nam frá Ingolfs-firðe til
Veiðe-lauso, ok Trékyllis-vík. Hann átte Álofo dóttor Ingolfs or
Ingolfs-firðe. Þeirra son vas Flose, es bió í Vík þá es Austmenn
bruto þar skip sítt; ok goerðo or hrænom [420] skip þat es þeir
kaolloðo Tré-kylli. Á því fór Flose útan, ok varð aftr-reka í
OExar-fiaorð--þaðan15 af goerðesk Saga Baoðmóðs Gerpis [421]
ok Grímolfs.


29. 1. Onundr Tréfótr, son Ufeigs Burlu-fótar, Ívars sonar Beytils:
Onundr vas á móti Harallde konunge í Hafrs-firðe, ok lét þar fót
sínn. Efter þat fór hann til Íslannz, ok nam land frá Kleifom til
Úfoero, Kallbaks-vík, Kolbeins-vík,20 [[158: ii. 32.]] Byrgis-vík; ok
bió í Kallbak til elle. Hann vas bróðer Goðbiargar, móðor Goðbrannz
Kúlo, faoðor Ásto, móðor Óláfs konungs ens Helga. Onundr átte feóra
sono; einn vas Grettir: annarr Þorgeirr Flosco-bak: þriðe Asgeirr
Æðe-kollr, faðer Kalfs, ok Hrefno es Ceartan átte; ok Þóríðar,
es Þorkell Cugge átte, en síðarr5 Steinþórr Óláfs son [422] Pá:
enn fiórðe son Onundar vas Þórgrímr Hæro-kollr, faðer Ásmundar,
faoðor Grettiss ens Sterka.

2. Biaorn hét maðr, es nam Biarnar-fiaorð; hann átte Liúfo. Þeirra
son vas Svanr at [423] Svans-hóle, es þar bió síðan ok drucknaðe á
firðenom, ok geck þar inn í fiallet at sýn.10

3. Steingrímr Trolle [424] nam Steingríms-fiaorð allan, ok bió í
Trolla-tungo. Hans son vas Þórer, faðer Halldórs, faoðor Þorvallz
Orgoða, faoðor Bitro-Odda, faoðor Oddz [f. Há-Snorra, f. Oddz munks,
ok Þorláks ok Þorarens Rosta]. [425]

4. Colle hét maðr, es nam Colla-fiaorð, ok Skriðins-enne; ok15 bió
under Felle meðan hann lifðe.

5. Þórbiaorn Bitra hét maðr; ok vas mikill víkingr ok ill-menne;
hann fór til Íslannz með skullda-lið sítt. Hann nam fiaorð þann es
nú heiter Bitra, ok bió þar. Nockoro síðarr braut Goðlaugr, bróðer
Gils [426] Skeiðar-nefs, skip sítt þar út við haofða þann es nú20
heiter Goðlaugs-haofðe. Goðlaugr komsk [427] á land, ok kona hans
[[159: ii. 33.]] ok dótter; en aðrer menn aller týndosk. Þá kom til
Þórbiaorn Bitra ok myrðe þau bæðe; en tók meyna ok foedde upp. En es
þessa varð varr Gils Skeiðar-nef, fór hann til ok hefnde bróðor síns,
ok drap Þórbiaorn Bitro, ok enn fleire menn aðra.--Við Goðlaug es
kend Goðlaugs-vík.5


30. 1. Balke hét maðr, son Bloeings, Sóta sonar. Hann fór til Íslannz
fyr ofríke Harallz konungs [428], ok nam Hrúta-fiaorð allan, ok bió
á Balka-staoðom hvaórom-tveggjom; ok síðarst í Boe, ok dó þar. Hans
son vas Berse Goðlauss, es fyrst bió á Bersa-staoðom í Hrúta-firðe;
en síðan nam hann Langa-vatz-dal,10 sem fyrr es ritið [429], ok átte
þar annat bú, áðr hann feck Þórdísar dóttor Þórhaddz or Hitár-dale,
ok tók með Holms-land. Þeirra son vas Arngeirr, faðer Biarnar
Hitdoela-kappa. Geirbiaorg vas dótter Balka, móðer Véleifs ens Gamla.

2. Arndís en Auðga, dótter Steinolfs ens Lága, nam síðan land15 í
Hrúta-firðe, út frá Borð-eyre. Hon bió í Boe: hennar son vas Þórðr
es bió fyrr í Múla í Saur-boe.

3. Greniaðr [430] ok Þrostr, syner Hermunder Holkins, naómo land í
Hrúta-firðe, inn frá Borð-eyre, ok bioggo at Melom. [Frá Gren-jaðe
vas komenn Hesta-Geller prestr, en Ormr frá Þreste.] [431] Sonr20
Þrastar vas Þórkell á Cers-eyre, faðer Goðrúnar, es átte Þórbiaorn
[[161: ii. 33.]] Þynna, son Hrómundar Hallta. Þeir bioggo at
Fagra-brecko. Þórleifr Hrómundar-fóstre vas son þeirra. Hásteinn hét
enn [432] son Hrómundar, þeir vóro aller um eitt ráð. Þórer hét son
Þórkels [433] Þrastar sonar: hann bió at Melom: Helga hét dótter hans.

4. Í þenna tíma kom Sleito-Helge út á Borð-eyre, ok Iorundr5 bróðer
hans. Þeir vóro víkingar; þeir fóro aller til Mela; tolf vóro þeir,
útan sveinar. Þá feck Helge Helgo Þóris dóttor. Þeim Hrómunde hurfo
stóð-hross: þat kendo þeir þeim Helga, ok stemnde Miðfiarðar-Skegge
þeim um stulð til Alþingiss; en þeir Hrómundr skyldr gæta héraðs,
ok haofðo virke gótt á Brecko.10 Austmenn bioggo skip sítt.

Þat vas einn morgin at hrafn kom á lióra á Brecko, ok gall hátt. Þá
kvað Hrómundr:


    Út heyr-ek svan sveita....


Þórbiaorn kvað:15


    Hlackar hagle....


Í þenna tíma kómo Austmenn í virket; þvi at verkmenn haofðo eige
aftr láteð. Þeir broeðr gengo út. Konor saogðo Hrómund of gamlan,
en Þórleif of ungan at ganga út--hann vas xix [434] vetra. Hann hlióp
út ok Þórleifr með vaópnom sínom ok kvað:20

[[163: ii. 33.]]


    Vara mer í dag dauðe ...


Austmenn fello sex í virkeno, en aðrer sex [435] stucko í braut. En
þá es Þórbiaorn vilde loka aftr virket, skaut Iorundr atgeir í gegnom
hann. Þórbiaorn tók atgeir ór sáreno, ok sette miðle herða Iorunde,
sva at út kom um briósteð; ok fello þeir báðer dauðer5 á iaorð. Helge
greip upp Iaorund, ok kastaðe hónom á bak ser, ok rann svá. Hásteinn
rann efter þeim þar til es Helge kastaðe hónom af bake sér; þá hvarf
hann aftr. Hrómundr vas fallenn, en Þórleifr vas sárr til ólífis. Konor
spurðo tíðenda. Hásteinn kvað:10


    Her hafa sex þeir es sæfask....


Konor spurðo hve marger þeir være. Hásteinn kvað:


    Varka ek fúrs með fleire, etc.


Konor spurðo, hverso marger fallner være af víkingom. Hásteinn kvað:15


    Siau hafa sæki tívar ... [436]
    Her mego hoele-borvar ...


Þeir Helge laogðo út enn sama dag, ok týndosk aller á Helga-skere
fyr Skriðins-enne. Þórleifr vas groeddr, ok bió at Brecko, [[167:
iii. 1.]] en Hásteinn fór útan ok fell á Ormenom Langa með Oláfe
konunge Tryggva syne.

5.  [437]Nú ero ritoð land-naóm flest í Vestfirðinga-fiórðunge, epter
því sem fróðer menn hafa sagt. Má þat nú heyra, at þann fiórðung hefer
mart stór-menne byggt, ok frá þeim ero margar5 gaofgar ætter komnar,
sem nú mátte heyra.










Here beginneth the Settlement of the West-frith-men's Quarter, which
was largely settled by men of birth.


1. 1. There was a man whose name was Calman or Colman, a Southrey-man
[by kin]. He went to Iceland, and came to Whale-frith, and abode by
Colman's river through the winter. Two of his sons were drowned in
Whale-frith, and afterwards he took land in settlement to the west
of White-river, between it and the Fleet, all Colman's-tongue, and so
all eastward under Iockle as far as the grass grows; and he dwelt at
Colman's-tongue. He was drowned in White-water as he was going south
on to the lava or rawn to visit his leman, and his howe is on the
White-water bank on the south. His son was Sturla gode, who first dwelt
at Sturla-stead under Tongue-fell upwards from Scald-skelm's-dale, but
afterwards he dwelt at Colman's-tongue. His son was Bearne, who had a
feud with Hrod-wolf the Younger and his son about Little-tongue. Then
Bearne made a vow to take Christendom, and after that the White-water
broke out a new bed, which it now runs in. Thus Bearne came to own
Little-tongue down past Grind and Solmund's-head.

2. Cylan or Culan was the name of Colman's brother. He dwelt beneath
Coll's-hammer. His son was Care, who had a feud with Carle Conalsson
of Carle-stead, the freedman of Hrod-wolf of Goat-land, about an ox;
and it turned out so that Carle got the ox. Then Care egged on his
thrall to slay Carle. The thrall pretended that he was mad, and ran
off south over the lava or rawn. Carle was sitting on his threshold,
and the thrall hewed him his death-blow, and afterwards Care slew
the thrall. Theod-wolf the son of Carle slew Cylan the son of Care in
Cylan's-holm; and after Theod-wolf burnt Care in his house at the place
that is now called the Burning. Bearne Sturla's son was baptized and
dwelt at Bearne-stead in Little-tongue, and had a church built there.


2. 1. Throw-end Nefia or Nebia was the name of a nobleman, the father
of Thor-stan, who had to wife Lopt-hen, daughter of Arne-beorn,
herse or lord of Friths. The sister of Lopt-hen was Arn-thrud,
whom Thore herse, the son of Hrod-wald, had to wife; and their son
was Aren-beorn. The mother of Arn-thrud was Anstrid Sloeki-dreng,
daughter of Brage the poet, and of Lopt-hen, the daughter of Erp
Lutandi [Yrp]. The son of Thor-stan and Lopt-hen was Horse-kell,
who had to wife Io-reid, the daughter of Alwe, the son of Fin, the
son of Möttol the king. Their son was named Hall-kell.

Hross-kell or Horse-kell went to Iceland and came into Ground-frith,
and dwelt first at Acre-ness; then Cetil and his brother would
not have him as neighbour; and afterwards he took in settlement
White-water-side, between Ciar-water and the Fleet. He dwelt at
Hall-kell's-stead, and Hall-kell his son after him, and had to wife
Thurid Dylla, daughter of Gund-laug of Thwart-water-lithe and of
We-laug, Aurlyg's daughter from Esia-rock.

Their children (Hall-kell's and Thurid's) were these: Thor-arin
and Fin-ward, Tind, and Illugi the Black, and Grima, whom Thorgils,
Are's son, had to wife. Thor-arin slew Mouse Balework in fight, when
he was dwelling in Rawn's-ridge. He built him a work or fort there,
and led White-water through the bank-shelf; but before this she used
to run down Mell-rack-dale or Sand-fox-dale. Illugi and Tind attacked
Balework in his work.

2. Horse-kell gave land to Throw-end, the father of Smith-cell
[Cathal Dubh], the father of these, Thor-arin and Ead-win, who were
the leaders of the Cave-men. He dwelt at Thor-wald-stead, and owned
all Fleets-dale up to the Fleet.

3. Horse-kell gave Thor-gaut, his shipmate, land down in Side. He
dwelt at Thor-gaut's-stead. His sons were the two Gislis.

4. Osbeorn the Wealthy, the son of Haurd, bought land south of
Cear-water up in Sledge-brook to Nit-berg or Knit-rock. He dwelt
at Osbeorn-stead. He had to wife Thor-borg, daughter of Mid-frith
Sceg. Their daughter was Inge-borg, whom Illugi the Black had to wife.

5. Arn-wolf or Erne-wolf was the name of a man who took in settlement
Arn-wolf's-dale and Cear-dale northward up to Nit-berg. Cetil Blund
[Cathal B....] bought land off Arn-wolf, all north of Cliff, and
dwelt in Arn-wolf's-dale. Then Arn-wolf built a homestead up in
Cear-dale, at the place now called Arn-wolf's-stead. Above Cliff it
is called Cear-dale, because there were brushwood and small shaws
between Cear-water and Thwart-water, so that it could not be dwelt
in. Blund-Cetil was a very wealthy man; he had the wood cleared far
and wide, and took up his abode there.

[M: Double Text.] Arn-wolf took for settlement the whole North-tongue
between Cear-water and Cross-water, and dwelt at Ern-wolf's-dale. His
son was Blund-Cetil, the father of Thor-kell, whom Hen-thori burnt in
his house, whence came the feud between Thord Gelle [Gilla] and Ord o'
Tongue. [Here the double text ends.]


3. 1. Hrod-mund was the name of a man, the brother of Grim the
Haleygoman. He came with his ship into White-river. He took in
settlement Thwart-water-dale and Thwart-water-lithe or slope down to
Hall-mull and forth to Thwart-water. He dwelt in Hrod-mund-stead, at
the place which is now called Call's-brink. His son was Gund-laug
Worm-tongue, who dwelt at Gund-laugs-stead, to the south of
Thwart-water. He had to wife We-laug, as was before written.

2. Hagene was the name of a shipmate of Hrod-munds. He dwelt at
Hagene's-stead. His son was Helgi of Helge's-mere, the father of
Arn-grim gode, who was at Blund-Cetil's Burning. Hagene was the
brother of Fier the Wealthy.

3. Is-laf and Is-red, brethren, took land in settlement down
from Sledge-beck, between Arn-wolf's-dale-water and White-water,
the upper land down to Red's-beck, and the southern land down
to Haurd's-hillock. Is-laf dwelt at Is-laf's-stead, but Is-red at
Is-red-stead, and he owned the land southerly along the White-water. He
was the father of Thor-beorn, the father of Liot o' Walls, who fell
in the Fight o' the Heath.

4. As-gar was the name of a shipmate of Hrod-mund's, that dwelt at
Hammer, up from Helge's-mere. He had to wife Hilda Star, daughter of
Thor-wald, son of Thor-grim Broeci. Their sons were these: Stan-beorn,
surnamed the Strong and the Hard-hitter, and Thor-ward, the father
of Maefa [Meabh], whom Rifla or Hrifla had to wife, and Thor-stan the
third, the fourth Helge, the father of Thord, the father of poet Helge.

5. Arn-borg or Erne-borg was the name of a woman. She dwelt at
Arn-berg-beck. Her sons were these: Eld-grim, that dwelt at Halse
or Neck, up from Arn-borg-beck at Eld-grim's-stead; and Thor-gest,
who got his death-wound when he and Hrane fought a battle at the
place which is now called Hrane's-fall.

6. Thorwen dwelt in Thorunn's-holt. She had land down to Wood-beck
and up over against that of Thurid Spae-queen, her sister, that dwelt
at Grave or Pit. After her Thorwen-pool in Thwart-water is named,
and from her are the Hammer-biders come.

7. Thor-beorn, son of Arn-beorn, the son of Aulaf Long-halse or
Long-neck; he was the brother of Lyting of Weapon-frith. Thor-beorn
took in settlement Staf-holts-tongue, between North-water and
Thwart-water. He dwelt at Erne-holt. His son was Tait of Staf-holt,
the father of Einar, and of Thor-wald, the father of Thor-ketla,
whom Hyrning, Clepp-iron's son, had to wife.

8. Thor-beorn Blese took land in settlement in North-dale on the south,
up from Croke, and all Cave-dale, and dwelt at Blesi-stead. His son
was Gisle of Mell [Downs] in Cave-dale. After him Gisle-mere was
named. Another son of Blese was Thor-fin of Thor-fin's-stead, father
of Thor-gerd Heath-widow, mother of Thord Erra, father of Thor-gerd,
mother of Helge of Lund [Grove].

9. Gar-mund, the son of Gund-beorn Gand [wand], took in settlement the
Tongue, between North-water and Sand-water, and dwelt at Tongue. His
son was Brune, father of Thor-beorn of Stone, who fell in the Fight o'
the Heath.

10. Erne the Old took in settlement Sand-dale and Narrow-dale, and
also North-water-dale, down from Croke to Erne's-boll, and dwelt
at Harec-stead.

11. Red-beorn took in settlement Beorn-dale, and the dale that goes
out of it, and he had one homestead down under Mell-fell-gil, and a
second down below in the county, as it is written.

[Double text.] Beorn was the name of a Northern man [Norwegian] that
came out late in the time of the settlement; and took in settlement
North-water-dale, north of North-water, and all Beorn's-dale, and
the dales that lead out of it. He dwelt at Dale-mouth. He was the
first man to forge iron-ore in Iceland, and therefore he was called
Red-ore Beorn. [Here the double text ends.]

12. Carle took in settlement Carle's-dale up above Hred-mere
[MS. Helga-mere], and dwelt under Carle's-fell, and owned the land
down to Even-scard marching with Grim's land.


4. 1. Thor-wolf was the name of a man that dwelt in Neams-dale. He
was the son of Wolf that was called Queld-wolf [i. e. Evening-wolf,
or Were-wolf]. Grim was the name of Wolf's second son. King
Harold Fairhair had Thor-wolf slain, and paid no were-gild withal;
but Grim avenged this, and then went to Iceland. But Wolf died at
sea. Scald-Grim [Grim the Bald] came in his ship into Gowe-water-oyce,
and took land between North-water and Heat-water, all that lieth
between fell and foreshore, and abode at Borg. He had to wife Bera,
daughter of Ingw-here. The sons of her and Scald-Grim were these:
Thor-wolf and Egil. These brothers both had to wife As-gerd,
the daughter of Beorn [Egil took to wife his brother's widow],
and Thor-wolf's daughter was Thor-dis, whom Grim o' Mossfell had to
wife. Thor-wolf fell at Win-heath in England [Brunanburh fight] in
battle; but Egil went to Iceland and abode at Borg, and his kinsmen
[after him] a long time. This is the original text of Are. The former
account of this family in Book I. 8 is the work of a later editor of
the Sturlung time.

2. Gris and Grim were the names of freedmen of Scald-Grim. He gave
them land up on the fell, to Gris Gris-tongue and to Grim Grims-dale.

3. There was a man named Balce, the son of Bloing, the son of Sote
of Sote-ness. He fought against king Harold at Hafrs-frith. He came
out to Iceland, and took in settlement all Ram-frith, and dwelt at
By. His son was Berse godlease, who took in settlement Lang-mere-dale,
and dwelt at Torf-whale-stead; his sister was Gar-borg, whom Thor-gar
Mel-dun [Maelduine] of Tongue-fell had to wife. Their son [was]
We-laf the Old, father of Battle-Wager-o'-Berse. Berse godlease had
to wife Thor-dis, daughter of Thor-ord of Hot-river-dale, and there
came with her from home [as her marriage portion] Holms-land, and
he dwelt there afterwards. Their son was Arn-gar, who had to wife
Thur-id, the daughter of Thor-fin the Strong. Their son was Beorn,
the champion of Hot-river-dale. The mother of Thur-rid was Se-unn or
Sea-wen, daughter of Scald-Grim.

4. Sig-mund was the name of a freedman of Scald-Grim. He gave him
land between Gliuf-water and North-water. He dwelt at Howe before he
moved to Munod-ness [Joy-ness]. After him Sig-mund-ness was called.

5. Red-Beorn bought land of Scald-Grim between Gliuf-water
[Cañon-river or Chine-river] and Gowe-water [Smith-river]. He dwelt
at Red-Beorn's-stead up above Eski-holt. His son was Thor-kell Trefil
of Scard and Helgi o' Hwam in North-dale; and he is howed or laid in
barrow there, and Gund-wald, the father of Thor-kell, who had to wife
Helga, daughter of Thor-gar of Willow-mere.

6. To Thor-beorn Crum and Thori-beigalldi, brethren, Scald-Grim gave
land beyond Gowe-water. Thor-beorn dwelt at Crum-hills, but Thore
at Beigallde.

7. To Thord the Giant and Thor-gar Earth-long, and Thor-berg Stang
or Pole, their sister, Scald-Grim gave land above Eincunn, out
alongside Lang-water. Thord dwelt at Giant-stead, and Thor-gar at
Earth-long-stead, and Thor-berg at Stangs-holt.

8. Ane was the name of a man to whom Grim gave land between Lang-water
and Hafs-beck. He dwelt at Ane's-brink. His son was Ean-wend Seone,
father of Stan-here and Dolla, the mother of Cormac.

9. Grim-wolf abode first at Grim-wolf-stead.  Grim's-fit and
Grim-wolf-beck take their names from him. His son was named Grim,
who dwelt south of the frith. His son was Grim-here, who dwelt at
Grim-here-stead. Thor-stan and Ord o' Tongue had a feud with him.

10. Grane dwelt at Grane-stead in Big-ness.

11. Thor-finn the Strong was the name of the standard-bearer of
Thor-wolf, Scald-Grim's son [brother?].  To him Scald-Grim gave
Sea-unn, his daughter, and land outside Lang-water, to Lear-becks
and up to the Fell, and [out] to Elfet's-river. He dwelt at
Force-water. Their daughter was Thor-dis, the mother of Beorn, the
Hot-dale champion.

12. Yngw-here was the name of a man, who was the father of Bera,
whom Scald-Grim had to wife. To him Grim gave land between Lear-becks
and Stream-frith. He dwelt at Elfets-ness. Another daughter of his
was Thor-dis, whom Thor-gar Lambh of Lamb-stead had to wife, the
father of Thord, whom the thralls of Cathal Gowe [smith] burnt in
his house. Thord's son was Lambh the Strong.

13. Stan-wolf was the name of a man that took in settlement both
Rawn-dales, all between Elfet-river and Hot-river, and up to Grit,
by leave of Scald-Grim, and dwelt at South Rawn-dale. His son was
Thor-laf, from whom the Rawn-dale-men are come. Thor-unn was the
name of Stan-wolf's daughter, whom Thor-beorn, Weevil's son, had
to wife. [He was] the father of Thor-gerd, the mother of Os-mund,
the father of Swegen-beorn, the father of Ord, the father of Gro
[Gruoch], the mother of Ord of Elfets-ness.

14. Thor-hard was the name of a nobleman, the son of Stan the
great sailor, the son of Wig-beoth [Ui-beth], the son of Beadmod of
Bulk-room. He took in settlement all Hot-river-dale down to Grit-water,
southward, and northward all between Hot-river and Cold-river to
the sea. His son was Thor-gar, the father of Haf-thor, the father of
Gud-ny, the mother of Thor-lac the Wealthy. Thor-gar's sons were these:
Grim of Scard, and Thor-arin, Fin-bow, Ey-stan, Gest and Torve.

15. Thor-gils Knop, a freedman of Coll Hrod-waldsson, took in
settlement Knop-dale. His sons were these: Ing-iald, Thor-arin, and
Thore, that dwelt at Acres, and owned all the land between Hot-river
and Elfet-river, and marching with the land of Stan-wolf. Thori's
[Thor-arin's] son was Thro-wend, who had to wife Stan-unn, the daughter
of Ram of Comb-ness. Their sons were Thori and [blank in S], Scum,
the father of Torve, the father of Tann [Tadg]. His son was Ram,
who had to wife Col-finna, the daughter of Illuge the Swarthy.

Now are told up the men who took up their abode in the settlement
of Scald-Grim.


5. 1. There was a man whose name was Grim, the son of Ing-iald, the son
of Rod-wald, of Hardings-dale, the brother of Asi herse. He went to
Iceland to seek for land, and sailed to the north of the country. He
was through the winter in Grimsey on Stan-grims-frith. Berg-dis was
the name of his wife, and Thore was his son.

2. Grim used to row out to fish in the winter [S: harvest-tide] with
his thralls, and his son used to be with him; and when the boy began
to grow cold, they wrapped him in a seal-skin bag, and pulled it up to
his  neck. Grim pulled up a merman. [And when he came up] Grim said,
'Do thou tell us our life and how long we shall live, or else thou
shalt never see thy home again.' 'It is of little worth to you to know
this [answers he], though it is to the boy in the seal-skin bag, for
thou shalt be dead ere the spring come, but thy son shall take up his
abode and take land in settlement where thy mare Scalm shall lie down
under the pack.' They got no more words out of him. But later in the
winter Grim died, and he is howed there. [S: Later in that winter Grim
and his men, all but the boy, went a fishing, and were all drowned.]

Berg-dis and Thore went in the spring out of Grimsey westward over
the Heath to Broad-frith. Scalm [the mare] went forth all the summer
and never lay down. The next winter they stayed at Scalm's-ness in
Broad-frith; but the summer after they turned southward, and Scalm
went on till they came off the Heath south to Borg-frith, where two red
sand-downs were, and there she lay under the pack below the outermost
sand-mell. There Thore took land in settlement, south of Gnup-water
to Cold-river, below Knop-dale, all between fell and foreshore. He
dwelt at the outer Red-mell.

3. Thore was old and blind when he came out of doors one evening,
and saw a man rowing into Cold-river-mouth in an iron boat;
great and wicked-looking he was, and he walked ashore up to the
homestead that is called Rip, and dug a fort there in the slope by
the fold-gate. And that night there came up fire out of the earth,
and burnt the Borg-lava. There was a homestead there then where the
lava-mound now is.

4. A son of Seal-Thore was Thor-finn, who had to wife Io-frid,
the daughter of Ord o' Tongue. Their sons were these: Thor-kell and
Thor-gils, Stan and Galte, Orm or Worm, and Thor-orm, and Thore.

Thor-finn's daughter was Thor-rid [S: Thor-borg], whom Thor-brand of
Elfets-frith had to wife.

Seal-Thore's kinsmen, those of them that were heathens, died into
[went after death into] Thore's-berg.

Thor-gils and Thor-kell, the sons of Thor-finn, both had to wife Unn
or Wen, the daughter of Alf-a-Dale. Scalm died at Scalm-well.

5. Colban Clack-head, the son of Atle of Atley in Fiolom, went to
Iceland, and bought land, all between Cold-river and Hot-river,
down off Sand-brink, and dwelt at Colban-stead. His son was Fin-bow
of Fair-shaw, and Thord the poet.

6. Thor-mod gode and Thord gnupa, the sons of Odd Rank, the son of
Thor-wid, the son of Frey-wid, the son of Alf of Vors. These brethren
went to Iceland, and took in settlement the land between Lax-water
and Stream-frith-river. Thord had Gnup-dale and dwelt there, and
his son Scofte after him. He was the father of Heor-Leif the gode,
and Finna whom Ref [Fox] the Big had to wife. Their son [was] Dalc
[Dealg], the father of Stan-unn or Stan-wen, the mother of poet Ref.

7. Thor-mod dwelt in Red-Coll-stead, and was called Thor-mod the Gode,
and he had to wife Gerd, daughter of Ceallac the Old. Their son was
Gud-laug or Gudh-laug the Wealthy. He had to wife Thor-dis, daughter of
Swart-head [Ceann Dubh], the son of Beorn Gold-bearer, and of Thor-rid,
daughter of Ord o' Tongue, who then dwelt at Harrow-holt. Gud-laug
the Wealthy saw that Red-mells-land was better than any other land
in the country round, so he challenged Thor-finn for his land, and
called him to the holm [to wager of battle]. They were both disabled
in the battle, but Thor-rid, daughter of Ord o' Tongue, healed them,
and set them at peace together.

8. Afterwards Gud-laug took land in settlement from Stream-frith on
to Force, between fell and foreshore, and dwelt at Borg-holt. From
him are come the Stream-frith-men. His son was Gud-laf, who had a cog,
and Thor-wolf, the son of Lopt the Old of Eyre-bank, another; wherewith
they fought against earl Gurth Sig-waldsson in Middle-frith-sound and
kept their goods, and upon this Gud-laf made Gurth's verses. Another
son of Gud-laug was Thor-fin, the father of Gud-laug, the father of
Thor-dis, the mother of Thord, the father of Sturla the Elder of Hwam.

9. Wale the Strong was the name of a henchman of king Harold
Fairhair. He wrought man-slaughter in a holy place, and so became an
outlaw. He went out to the Southreys [Sodor Is.], and three of his
sons came to Iceland. Hlif Horse-gelder was their mother. One of them
was called Atli, another Alf-warin, the third Ead-win Stud [S: Stot].

Atle Wale's son and As-mund, his son, took land in settlement from Fur
[Shallow] to Lysa. As-mund dwelt in Lang-holt at Thora-toft. He had to
wife Langholt-Thora. But when As-mund grew old he parted from Thora,
for the too great throng of strangers that came there, and went into
Oxl-land [Shoulder] and dwelt there till his death-day.

10. As-mund was put in howe there, and laid in a ship, and his thrall
with him, who slew himself, and would not live after As-mund. He was
laid in the other end of the ship. A little later Thora dreamed that
As-mund told her that he was annoyed by the thrall. The place is called
As-mund's grave where he is howed. This verse was heard in his howe:--

[The verse is doubtful. See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 328.]

After that the howe was searched, and the thrall put out of the ship.

Thora had a hall built across the highway, and had a board ever
standing there; and she sat outside on a stool, and asked every one
that would to come and eat.

Atle, the son of As-mund, was the father of Swart, the father of
Gud-laf, the father of Gud-brand, the father of Swart the Smith,
the father of priest Ey-wolf the monk.

11. Rolf or Hrod-wolf the Thick, the son of Ey-wind Oak-crook,
the brother of Illugi the gode of Fell, east by Side, took land in
settlement from Lysa to Rawn-Raven. His son was Helgi of Temple-garth,
the father of Fin-bow, and Beorn, and Hrod-wolf. Beorn was the father
of Guest, the father of poet Ref.

12. Solwe was the name of a man that took land in settlement between
Cave-rawn [lava] and Sledge-bone-water. He dwelt at Burning first, and
afterwards at Solve-crags, for he thought he could do more good there.


6. 1. Sig-mund, the son of Cetil Thistle, who had taken in settlement
Thistle's-frith. He had to wife Hilde-gund. He took land in settlement
between Cave-rawn and Bear-wick-rawn [lava]. He dwelt at Bath-brink,
and is howed there. He had three sons. One was Einar or Ein-here,
that afterwards dwelt at Bath-brink. Father and son sold Lon-land to
Einar, that afterwards dwelt there. He was called Lon Einar.

2. A whale drifted into his foreshore, and he cut part of it up,
but the weather broke it away and drove it into the land of Einar
Sig-mundsson. Lon Einar said that Hildigund's witchcraft had caused
this.

But when the whale was drifted out to sea away from Lon Einar, he
set out, and followed it, and came upon it as Einar Sig-mundsson was
cutting it up with his house carles. He cut at one of them, and gave
him his death-blow.  Bath-brink Einar bade his namesake begone, 'for
it will not do for you to attack us.' Lon Einar went off, for he had
too few men with him. Einar Sig-mundsson moved the whale hence. But
on a time when he was not at home, Lon Einar came to Bath-brink with
six men and summoned Hilde-gund for witchcraft. She was the daughter
of Beini, the son of Mo, the son of Naddod of the Faereys. Einar came
home just as Lon Einar was gone away. Hildi-gund told him the news,
and gave him a new-made kirtle. Einar took his shield and sword,
and a work-horse, and rode after them; and the horse foundered at
Mound-berg. Then Einar ran on as well as he could. But when he came
beside the Drongs [sea-cliffs], he saw a troll-man [giant] sitting upon
them, and dangling his feet so that they touched the surf, and dashing
them together, so that the foam was dashed up from them, and he quoth a
verse. [See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 329. The verse has been retouched and
altered by a later editor. See Notes.] Einar paid no heed to this. He
came up with the others at a place called Man-falls-brink, and there
they fought; but no iron could bite as Einar's kirtle. Four of Lon
Einar's men fell, and two fled from him. The two namesakes fought long
until the breech-belt of Lon Einar broke, and as he caught hold of it
his namesake cut at him and gave him his death-blow. But Red-here,
the thrall of Einar Sig-mundsson, saw him going off so hastily,
and ran after him, and he saw the thralls of Lon Einar running away,
and ran after them, and slew them both in Thrall-wick. And for this
Einar gave him his freedom, and as much land as he could fence in in
three days. The place is now called Red-here's-close where he dwelt.

3. Einar afterwards dwelt at Bath-brink, and he is howed there
a short way from Sig-mund's howe, and his howe is ever green both
winter and summer.

4. Einar of Bath-brink had to wife Unn, the daughter of Thori,
the brother of As-lac of Lang-dale. Hall-wih was their daughter,
whom Thor-beorn, Weevil's son, had to wife. Braid was the name of
another son of Sig-mund, the brother [blank]. He had to wife Gund-hild,
the daughter of As-lac of Lang-dale. Their son was Thor-mod, who had
to wife Helga Ean-wend's daughter, the sister of Poet-Raven. Their
daughter [was] Her-thrud, whom Simon had to wife. Their daughter
[was] Gund-hild, whom Thor-gils had to wife. Their daughter [was]
Wal-gerd, the mother of Fin-bow the Strong, the son of Gar. A third
son of Sig-mund was named Thor-kell. He had to wife Io-red, daughter
[of Tind] Hall-kell, son [blank for 12 letters].

5. Thor-kell was the name of Lon Einar's son. He had to wife Grima,
daughter of Hall-kell, before Thor-gils, Ari's son, had her to
wife. Their son was Fin-ward.

Bath-brink Einar's daughter was Arn-thora, whom Thor-gar, Wevil's son,
had to wife. Their daughter was Yngw-hild, whom Thor-stan, the son of
Snorri gode, had to wife. Their daughter [was] Ing-ud, whom As-beorn,
Arn-thor's son, had to wife.

7. 1. Grim-kell was the name of a man who was the son of Wolf Crake,
Red-here's son, the brother of Gund-beorn, after whom Gund-beorn's-reef
was called. He took land in settlement from Bear-sarks-rawn to
Ness-rawn, and west over Ondurt-ness, and dwelt at Saxe's-hillock,
whence he drove out Saxe, the son of Elf-wine, the son of Wale;
and he dwelt thereafter at Rawn, beside Saxe's-hillock. Grim-kell
had to wife Thor-gerd, daughter of Wal-theow the Old. Their son was
Thor-arin Corne; he was very skin-strong, or lycanthropic, and he
lies in Corne's-howe. Thus quoth a man that had broken into his howe
(see Corpus Poet, Bor. i. 362):--


    I sprung into Corne's howe,
    And carried away his belt and his ring.


Thor-arin Corne had to wife Iorunn, the daughter of Einar o'
Staf-holt. Their daughter [was] Iron-gerd, whom Wolf Uggson had
to wife.

2. Claeng was the name of another son of Grim-kell. He had to wife
Ord-frid, daughter of Helgi of Hwan-eyre [Angelica-eyre]. Their son
[was] Colle, who had to wife Thor-rid, the daughter of As-brand of
Comb. Their son Was Sceg, father of Thor-catla, whom Illugi had to
wife, the son of Thor-wald, the son of Tind, the father of Gils, who
slew Giaf-wald. Bard was the name of another son of Coll. He had to
wife Wal-gerd, daughter of Wid-here. Wig-dis was their daughter, whom
Thor-beorn the Thick had to wife. Their daughter [was] Thor-dis, whom
Thor-brand of Aul-wers-mere had to wife. Thore was a son of theirs, and
Bearne of Broad-bowster, and Torve. Asdis was the name of another of
Bard's daughters. Thor-beorn Thor-waldsson, the brother of Moon-Leot by
the same mother, had her to wife first. Their children were: Thor-rid,
whom Thor-grim, Ord's son, had to wife; their children, Gar-mund of
Maw-lithe, and thirteen others. Scule Ior-wendsson afterwards had
Asdis to wife; Walgerd o' Moss-fell was their daughter.

3. Alf-arin, the son of Wale, had first taken in settlement all
the ness between Bear-wick-rawn and Brow. His sons were these:
Haus-coll, that dwelt at Haus-colls-river, and Ingiald, that dwelt
at Ingiald's-hillock, and Gote at Gote's-beck, and Holm-kell at Force
by Holm-kell's-river.

4. An-laf Bag was the name of a man that took land in settlement
inside of Brow up to Force-water, and dwelt at Anlaf's-wick.

5. Worm the Slender was the name of a man that came with his ship
into Frodes-mouth, and dwelt at Brimils-field [Surf-seals-field]
some winters. An-laf Bag drove him away, and took in settlement all
the old wick between Brow and Byland's-head, and he dwelt afterwards
at Frod-water. His son was Thor-beorn the Thick, that fought with
Thor-arin the Black, and fell himself and three men with him,
whereon Thor-arin made the Mew-lithe-men's verses, according as it
is told in the History of the Eyrebiders. This is one of them. [See
Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 57-60.] Because of these words they fought a
second time.

Thor-beorn had to wife Thor-rid, daughter of Bare the Thick, the son
of Thor-stan Torsk-biter. Their son was Cetil Champion, and he was
at that time abroad; he was the father of Hrod-ny, whom Thor-stan,
the son of Battle Styr, had to wife.

[S: Double text.] His son was Thor-beorn the Thick. He had to wife
first Thor-rid, the daughter of Asbrand of Cambe, and their children
were Cetil Champion, Hall-stan, and Gund-laug, and Thor-gerd, whom
A-mund Seone had to wife. Afterwards Thor-beorn had to wife Thor-rid,
daughter of Bare the Thick, and Thor-dis, Sour's daughter. [Here ends
the double text.]

6. Thor-beorn the Thick summoned Gar-rid Bow-foot's daughter for
witchcraft.  After his son Gund-laug died of madness, which he caught
when he went to learn wisdom from Gar-rid. She was the mother of
Thor-arin the Mew-lithe. In this case Arn-kell the gode was called
on to summon an Inquest of Twelve, and cleared her, for Thor-arin
took oath at the altar-ring, and so the case fell to the ground. But
after that some stallions of Thor-beorn were lost in the fell, and he
charged this on Thor-arin, and went to Mew-lithe, and set a door-doom
or court of execution. They were twelve together; but Thor-arin and
his men were seven against them--Alf-gar, a Southrey-man [Sodor-man],
and Nail, and Beorn the East-man, and three house carles. They broke
up the court, and fought there in the yard. Ead Thor-arin's wife
called on the women to part them. But one man fell of Thor-arin's,
and two of Thor-beorn's. Thor-beorn and his men went off, and bound
up their wounds by the stack-yard up beside Walls. Ead's hand was
found in the yard. Then Thor-arin went after them, and came upon
them near the garth. Nail fled weeping away and up into the fell;
and Thor-arin slew Thor-beorn there, and wounded Hall-stan to the
death. Five of Thor-beorn's men fell there.

Arn-kell and Wer-mund helped Thor-arin, and gathered a force at
Arn-kells. Snorre the gode took up the case for Thor-beorn's death,
and outlawed at Thors-ness-moot all those that had been at the
slaughter. After that he burnt Alf-gar's boat at Salt-eyre-mouth;
Arn-kell bought them another ship at Daymeals-ness, and conveyed them
out beyond the Islands. Thence arose the enmity between Arn-kell and
Snorri the gode. Cetil the Champion was then abroad. He was the father
of Hrod-ny, whom Thor-stan, Battle-Styr's son, had to wife.

7. Sigrod Swine-head was a great champion: he dwelt at Quern-voe-strand
[Mill-stone quarry bay].

Here-wolf, his son, was eight years old when he slew a bear o' the
wood, because he had bitten his goat, whereon this ditty was made:--


    Bruin Lack-tail bit Herewolf's goat;
    But Herewolf hocker-tail [bowed-tail] avenged his goat on Bruin.


Here-wolf was twelve winters old when he avenged his father. He was
the doughtiest of men.

8. Here-wolf went out to Iceland in his old age, and took land
in settlement between By-lands-head and Kirk-frith. His son was
Thor-stan Col-sceg or Coal-beard, the father of Thor-wolf, the father
of Thor-arin the Swarthy, the Mew-lithe-man, and of Gud-ny, whom
Wer-mund the Slender had to wife. Their son was Brand the Open-handed,
and [their daughter] Thor-finna, whom Thor-stan Cog's son had to wife.

8. 1. West-here, the son of Thor-wolf Bladder-pate. He had to wife Swan
[MS: Span], Here-red's daughter. Their son was Os-gar. West-here went
to Iceland with his father, a very old man, and took in settlement
Eyre-land, and the river between Kirk-frith and Col-grave-frith,
and dwelt at Andorth-Eyre. Thor-wolf and his son are both howed at
Scald-ness or Pate-ness.

Os-gar, West-here's son, had to wife Helga, Ceallac's daughter. Their
son was Thor-lac; his son was Stan-thor, whose mother was Thor-rid,
daughter of Ead-win Stot. A second son was Thord Bligh, who had to wife
Ord-katla, daughter of Thor-wald, the son of Thor-mod the gode. The
third son was Thor-mod, who had to wife Thor-gerd, the daughter of
Thor-brand of Elfets-frith. His fourth son was Berg-thor, who fell in
Veir-frith. Stan-thor had to wife Thor-rid, the daughter of Thor-gils,
Ari's son. Gund-laug was their son, who had to wife Thor-rid the Wise,
the daughter of Snorre gode.

2. Col was the name of a man that took land in settlement from west
of Friths'-horn to Trolls'-neck, and west over Bear-sarks-eyre to
Rawn-frith or Lava-frith. His son was Thor-arin, and Thor-grim,
after whom Colsons-fell is named. The father and sons all dwelt at
Col-grave. From them are come the Col-grave-men.

3. Ead-win Stot [was] the son of Wale the Strong. He had to wife
Myruna [Muir-wen], the daughter of Beadh-mac [S: Maddad], king of
the Irish. He took in settlement all Rawns-frith down from Rawn,
between Swine-mere and Trolls-neck. He dwelt at Rawns-frith, and was
a big strong man. From him are come the Stream-frith-men.

4. In the autumn he saw an apple-gray stallion run down from Hards-mere
[or Herd's-mere] and go to his stud-horses, and he overcame Ead-win's
stallion. Then Ead-win went and caught the gray horse, and put him
into a sled, such as a yoke of oxen draw, and so carted home all
his tedded hay. This stallion was easy-tempered till noon; but as
the day wore on he would stamp up to his fetlocks in the ground,
but after sunset he tore away his harness, and ran up to the mere,
and was never seen again.

5. The son of Ead-win was Stan, the father of Helga, whom An of Rawn
had to wife. Their son was Mar, the father of Gud-rid, the mother of
Ceartan [Cheartach] and Ani of Kirk-fell. As-beorn was the name of
another son of Ead-win; the third was Swart-head [Ceann Dubh], and
[their] daughter Thor-rid, whom As-gar of Eyre had to wife. Their
son was Thor-lac.


9. 1. Beorn was the name of the son of Cetil Flat-neb and of Yngw-hild,
daughter of Cetil Wether, the herse of Ring-ric. Beorn abode behind
in his own land when his father Cetil went to the Southreys; but when
Cetil withheld the scot or tribute-money from king Harold Fairhair,
then the king drove Beorn, his son, out of his own lands and took
them into his own hands. Then Beorn went west over sea; but he would
not settle down there, nor take on him Christendom like the other
children of Cetil, wherefore he was called Beorn the Eastron. He had
to wife Geaf-laug [Geibh-leach], Ceallac's daughter, the sister of
Beorn the Strong.

2. Beorn the Eastron went to Iceland, and took land in settlement
between Rawns-frith and Staf-water, and dwelt in Beorn-haven at
Borg-holt, and had the shielings up at Shiels, and kept up a great
estate. He died in Beorn-haven, and was howed by Borg-beck.

3. The son of Beorn and Geaf-laug was Ceallac the Old that dwelt at
Beorn-haven after his father; and [also] Oht-here, the father of
Beorn, the father of Wig-fus of Drapa-lithe, whom Snorre gode had
slain. Another son of Oht-here was Helge. He harried in Scotland,
and won there as his booty Nidh-beorg, daughter of king Beolan and
Cadh-lina [Cath-leen], daughter of Walking-Rolf.  He took her to
wife, and their son was Os-wif the Sage, and Einar Rattle-Scale,
who was drowned on Einars-reef in Shiel-sound [H: Seal-sound], and
his shield came ashore at Shield-ey, and his cloak at Cloak-holm.

Einar was the father of Thor-gerd, the mother of Her-dis, the mother
of Stan the poet. Os-wif had to wife Thor-dis, the daughter of
Theod-wolf of Haven. Their children were Os-pac, the father of Wolf
the Marshall or Staller, and Thor-wolf, Tor-rad, Einar, Thor-kell,
and Thor-beorn. They were outlawed for the slaughter of Ceartan
[Cheartach] Anlafsson. Os-wif's daughter was Gud-run, the mother of
Thord-cat and Thor-lac and Bolli and Gelli.

Wil-gar was the name of a son of Beorn the Eastron.

4. Ceallac the Old had to wife Astrid, the daughter of herse Rod-wolf
and Ond-otta, sister of Aulwi Bairn-carle. Their son was Thor-grim
gode; his sons Battle-Styr, and Wer-mund the Slender, and Brand,
father of Thor-lac.

The daughters of Ceallac the Old were Gerd, whom Thor-mod gode had
to wife, and Helga, whom As-gar of Eyre had to wife.


10. 1. Thor-wolf, the son of Erne-wolf Whale-driver, dwelt in Mostr,
wherefore he was called Moster-beardie. He was a great sacrificer,
and put his trust in Thor [Thunder]. He came to Iceland by reason
of the oppression of king Harold, and sailed to the south of the
country. But when he came west off Broad-frith, he cast his porch
pillars overboard, whereon Thunder was carven, saying as he did so
that Thunder should go ashore where he wished Thor-wolf to settle,
and promising to hallow to Thunder all his settlement and call it
after him. Thor-wolf sailed into Broad-frith, and named the frith,
and landed on the south of the frith near the middle, and there he
found Thunder driven on a ness, which is now called Thor's-ness or
Thunder-ness. They landed there in a creek or bay, which Thor-wolf
called Temple-voe. There he raised his homestead, and made there a
great temple, and hallowed it to Thunder, at the place that is now
called Temple-stead. The frith was well-nigh unsettled at that time.

2. Thor-wolf took in settlement the land from Staf-water inward
to Thors-river, and called it Thors-ness. He had so great faith in
the mountain that stood upon the ness that he called it Holy-fell,
and thereat should no man look [pray] unwashen; moreover there was
such a hallowed place of peace or sanctuary there, that nothing,
whether man or beast, might be harmed or put to death on that hill
[nor driven off], save it came off of its own will. It was the faith
of Thor-wolf and all his kin that they should all die into this hill.

3. There on the ness where Thunder came ashore Thor-wolf held all dooms
[courts], and there was set up or established the Hundred-moot, by
the counsel and authority of all the men of that part. And when men
were there at the moot there should be no elf-driving [defilement]
made on shore; but there was a reef appointed to this end that they
called Dirt-reef, for they would not have such a holy field defiled
[as that was].

4. But when Thor-wolf was dead, and Thor-stan his son still young, then
Thor-grim, Ceallac's son, and Os-gar, his brother-in-law, would not
go out to this reef to do their errands, and the Thors-ness-men would
not endure that such a holy field should be defiled, wherefore they
fought, Thor-stan Torsk-biter and Thor-gar Brooch against Thor-grim
and Os-gar, there on the moot about the reef; and certain men fell
there, and many more were wounded, ere they were set at peace. Thord
Gelli set them at one; and inasmuch as neither side would let their
case drop, and as the field was now unhallowed by bloodshed in feud,
it was agreed to carry the moot away from that place and inland
to the ness where it now is. It was then a very holy place. There
standeth still Thunder's stone, on which they broke the men that they
sacrificed there, and hard by is the doom-ring where they doomed men
to be sacrificed. There Thord Gelli sat or established a Quarter-moot,
by the counsel and authority of all the men of the Quarter.

5. A son of Thor-wolf Most-beardie was Hall-stan the Torsk-frith gode,
the father of Thor-stan Swart the Sage. Osc was mother of Thor-stan
Swart, the daughter of Thor-stan the Red. Another son of Thor-wolf was
Thor-stan Torsk-biter. He had to wife Thora, the daughter of Anlaf
Feilan, and the sister of Thord Gelle. Their son was Thor-grim, the
father of Snorre gode, and Barc the Thick, who was the father of Sam,
whom As-gar slew.


11. 1. Gar-rod or Gar-fred was the name of a man that went to Iceland,
and with him Fin-gar, the son of Thor-stan Snow-skate, and Wolf-here
the Champion. They came from Haloga-land to Iceland. Gar-rod took land
in settlement from Thors-river up to Lang-dale-water. He dwelt at Eyre.

2. Gar-rod gave land to Wolf-here, his shipmate, on both sides of
Wolf-here's-fell, and inward from the fell.

3. Gar-rod gave Fin-gar land up over Elfets-frith. He dwelt at the
place that is now called Cars-stead. He was the father of Thor-fin,
the father of Thor-brand of Elfets-frith, who had to wife Thor-borg,
the daughter of Thor-fin, Seal-Thori's son.

4. Gar-rid was the name of a sister of Gar-rod, a widow after Beorn,
the son of Bale-work Blindinga-triona [prow-fixing]. Thor-wolf was
the name of their son. Gar-rid and Thor-wolf went to Iceland after
the death of Beorn, and were the first winter at Eyre. In the spring
Gar-rod gave his sister a homestead in Borg-dale-land. Thor-wolf went
abroad, and lay out on wicking-cruises. Gar-rid did not spare her
food, but had her hall built across the highway. She used to sit on
a stool outside and bade guests in, and a board or table was always
standing indoors with meat upon it.

Thor-wolf came back to Iceland after Gar-rid's death. He challenged
Wolf-here for his land, and offered him wager of battle. Wolf-here
was old and childless; he fell in the wager of battle, but Thor-wolf
was wounded in the foot, and went lame ever after, wherefore he was
called Bow-foot. Thor-wolf took some of Wolf-here's land after him;
but some Thor-fin of Elfets-frith took, putting in it two of his
freedmen, Wolf-here and Aurlyg.

5. Gar-rod of Eyre was the father of Thor-gar Brooch, who moved his
homestead out of Eyre up under the fell. He was the father of Thord,
the father of Atle.

Thor-wolf Bow-foot was the father of Arn-kell gode and Gar-rid,
whom Thor-wolf of Mew-lithe, the father of Thor-arin, had to wife.

6. The sons of Thor-brand of Elfets-frith, son of Thor-fin, were these:
Thor-laf Cimbe, and Thor-ord, Snorre, Thor-fin, Illugi, Thor-mod. They
had a feud with Arn-kell gode on the heritage of their freedmen,
and were at his slaying with Snorre gode at Aurlyg-stead. After that
Thor-laf Cimbe went abroad, and it was then that Arn-beorn, the son of
As-brand of Broad-wick, struck him with a porridge-spurtle. Cimbe made
game of it. Thord Blig or Bligh twitted him with it at Thor-ness-moot,
when he asked for his sister Helga to wife. Then Cimbe struck Bligh
with a sand-turf, whence arose the feuds of the Eyre-biders and the
sons of Thor-brand and Snorre gode. They fought at Gar-wor, and in
Elfets-frith, and in Weir-frith or Spears-frith.

7. Thor-berg was the name of a man that went from Ja-frith to Iceland,
and took in settlement both the Lang-dales, and dwelt in Western
Lang-dale. His son was As-lac, who had to wife Arn-laf, daughter
of Thord Gelli. Their children [were these]: Illugi the Strong and
Gund-hild, whom Broad first had to wife, but afterwards Hall-dor of
Holm-lair. Illugi the Strong had to wife Gud-laf, the daughter of
Cetil Smithy-block. Their sons [were] Ey-wolf and Eindride and Coll
and Gelli; and their daughters Here-thrud, whom Thorgrim, the son
of Wer-mund the Slender, had to wife; and Frith-gerd, whom Ord, the
son of Drafli, had to wife; and Gud-rid, whom Berg [or Berg-thor],
the son of Thor-mod, the son of Thor-lac, first had to wife, and
afterwards Ior-wend of Scorri-dale; and Io-dis, whom Mar, the son of
Illugi, Ari's son, had to wife; and Arn-laf, that Coll, the son of
Thord Bligh, had to wife. From Illugi are the Lang-dales-men come.

8. Stan, the wide-sailor, the son of Wig-biod [Ui Beth?], the
brother of Thore-haust-myrk, took in settlement Shaw-strand up to
match with the land of Thor-berg, and inside to Lax-water. He dwelt
at Broad-bowster. His son was Thor-hard, who took in settlement
Hot-dale, and Thor-gest, who had to wife Arn-ora, the daughter of
Thord Gelli. Their sons [of Thor-gest and Arn-ora] were Stan the
Law-speaker, and Haf-lide, and Thor-hard.


12. 1. Thor-wald, the son of As-wald, the son of Wolf, the son
of Oxen-Thori, and Eiric the Red, his son, left Iader for the
sake of manslaughter [done there], and took in settlement land
at Horn-strand, and dwelt at Drongs, where Thor-wald died. Then
Eiric took to wife Theod-hild, daughter of Ior-wend, Atli's son,
and of Thor-borg Cog-breast, whom Thor-beorn the Hawk-dale-man then
had to wife. Upon which Eiric removed from the North, and made
a clearance in Hawk-dale, and dwelt at Eiric's-stead hard by the
Mere-horn. Then Eiric's thralls made an avalanche to fall down upon
Wal-theow's house at Wal-theow-stead, but Ey-wolf Saur or Sour, his
kinsman, slew the thralls close by Sceid's-brink, up above Mere-horn;
whereupon Eiric slew Ey-wolf Saur. He also slew Wager of Battle-Raven
at Game-halls. Gar-stan and Ord of Iorwa, the kinsmen of Ey-wolf,
took up the case after him, and Eiric was put out of Hawk-dale. He
took in settlement then Brock-ey and Oxen-ey, and dwelt at Ted in
Southrey the first winter.

2. But he lent Thor-gest his seat-stocks [high-seat
pillars]. Afterwards Eiric went to Oxen-ey, and dwelt at
Eiric's-stead. Then he called for his seat-stocks, but could
not get them. Eiric fetched the seat-stocks at Broad-bowster, but
Thor-gest came after him. They fought a short way from the houses at
Drongs. There fell the two sons of Thor-gest, and some other men. After
this they both kept a company of armed men with them. Styr and Ey-wolf
Æsa's son of Swiney sided with Eiric, as did the sons of Thor-brand of
Elfets-frith, and Thor-beorn, Weevil's son. But Thor-gest was backed
by the sons of Thord-Gelli and Thor-gar of Hot-dale-river, As-lac of
Lang-dale, and Illugi his son. Eiric and his fellows were outlawed
at Thor-ness-moot. He made his ship ready for sea in Eiric's-voe;
but Ey-wolf hid him in Dimun-voe while Thor-gest was seeking for him
out in the Islands. Thor-beorn and Ey-wolf and Styr conveyed Eiric
out through the Islands. He told them that he was minded to go in
quest of that land which Gund-beorn, the son of Wolf Crow, saw when
he was driven west of Iceland and found Gund-beorn's-reef. He said
that he would seek back to his friends if he found the land.

3. Eiric sailed from Snow-fells-iockle or Glacier, and made Mid-iockle
or Glacier [in Greenland], at a place called Blue-Sark. He stood
thence [i. e. from Blue-Sark] south along the land to find out if
it were inhabitable anywhere. He sailed west of Wharf [doubled Cape
Wharf], and he stayed the first winter in Eiricsey near the middle
of East-settlement, and the spring after he went to Eiric's-frith,
and made him a homestead there, and gave the places in country round
far and wide names. The second winter he stayed in Eiric's-holm, off
Wharf-peak; but the third summer he went right north to Snow-fell,
and inside up Raven's-frith. Then he thought he was come to the bottom
of Eiric's-frith, and he turned back again, and was the third winter
in Eiricsey off Eiric's-frith-mouth.

4. After this the same summer he went to Iceland, coming into
Broad-frith. That winter he was at Holm's-lair with Ing-wolf. In
the spring Eiric and Thor-gest fought, and Eiric got the worst of
it. After that they were set at one.

5. That summer Eiric went out to settle the land that he had found,
and which he called Green-land; for he said that men would be the
more ready to go thither if it had a good name.

6. Ari, Thor-gils son, says that that summer five-and-twenty ships
sailed to Green-land out of Borg-frith and Broad-frith; but fourteen
only reached [their port]; some were driven back, and some were lost.

This was 16 [S: 15] winters before Christendom was made law in Iceland.

7. There was a man named Here-wolf, the son of Bard, the son of
Here-wolf, the kinsman of Ing-wolf the Settler. To this [elder]
Here-wolf Ing-wolf gave land between the Voe and Reek-ness. Here-wolf
the Younger went to Greenland with Eiric. With him on board his
ship was a Southrey-man, a Christian, that made the Sea-Fence Pæan,
wherein is this stave:--


    I pray the guileless Patron of the Monks to forward my voyage.
    May the Lord of Earth's lofty Hall hold his hand over me!


                            [See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 54.]


Here-wolf took in settlement Here-wolf's-frith, and dwelt at
Here-wolf's-ness; he was the most well-born of men.

8. Eiric the Red took in settlement Eiric's-frith, and dwelt at
Brent-lithe, and Leif, his son, after him.

9. These men took land in settlement in Greenland, and went out
with Eiric; [then] Here-wolf Here-wolf's-frith, and he dwelt at
Here-wolf's-ness; Cetil, Cetil's-frith; Raven, Raven's-frith; Solwe,
Solwe's-dale; Snorre, Thor-brand's son, Elfets-frith; Thor-beorn
Glora, Mast-frith; Einar, Einar's-frith; Haf-grim, Haf-grim's-frith
and Mere's-wharf; Arn-laugh or Erne-low, Arn-laugh's-frith; but some
went to the Western Settlements.

10. There was a man named Thor-kell fare-sark, the mother's cousin [on
the sister side] of Eiric the Red. He went to Greenland with Eiric,
and took in settlement Whalesey-frith, and between Eiric's-frith
and Einar's-frith, and dwelt at Whalesey-frith. From him are the
Whalesey-frith-folk come. He was very greatly strength-eked [i. e. had
magic strength]. He swam after a fat wether out to Whalesey, and
carried it home on his back when he wished to welcome his kinsman
Eiric; for his boat was not sea-worthy. It is a long half week or
mile. Thor-kell is buried in the yard at Whalesey-frith, and has ever
since haunted the houses there.


13. 1. Ing-wolf the Strong and Thor-wald, the sons of Ari, the son
of Awald Pinched-in-the-Breast, took land in settlement inward from
Lax-water to Scram-leap-water, and dwelt at Holm-lair. The son of
Thor-wald was Thor-laf, the father of Hall-dor, who afterwards had
to wife Gund-hild, the daughter of As-lac, the son of Hrod-here
o' Lang-dale. Their son was Thori, who had to wife Hall-weig,
the daughter of Tind, the wife of Hall-kell. Their son was Brand,
who had to wife Thor-gerd, Brand's daughter. Their son was Hall-dor,
who had to wife Thor-katla, Thor-grim's daughter. Their son was prior
Brand the historian, who hath written most of the Genealogy of the
Borg-frith-folk.


14. 1. Anlaf the White was the name of a Host-king. He was the son of
king Ingiald, the son of Helgi, the son of Anlaf, the son of God-fred,
the son of Half-dan White-leg, the king of the Upland-folk. Anlaf the
White harried in the West in wicking cruises, and won Dyflin [Dublin]
in Ireland, and Dublin-shire, and made himself king over it. He took
to wife Aud or Ead the Deep-wealthy, the daughter of Cetil Flat-neb,
the son of Beorn Buna, a lord of Norway. Thor-stan the Red was the
name of their son. Anlaf fell in Ireland in battle, but Aud and
Thor-stan went then to the Southreys. Then Thor-stan took to wife
Thor-rid, the daughter of Ey-wind the Eastman, the sister of Helgi
the Lean. They had many children. Anlaf Feilan [Bull] was the name of
their son, and their daughters were Groa [Gruoch] and Olof, and Osc
and Thor-hilda, Thor-gerd and Wig-dis. Thor-stan became Host-king,
and joined fellowship with Sig-rod the mighty earl, the son of Ey-stan
Glumra. They won Cata-ness [Caithness] and Sutherland, Ros [Ross] and
Morævi [Moray], and more than half Scotland. Thor-stan was king over
[these lands] till the Scots betrayed him, and he fell there in battle.

2. Aud was in Caithness when she heard the news of the fall of
Thor-stan. She had a cog made in a wood in secret; and when she
was ready she held her course out to the Orkneys. There she gave
in marriage Gruoch, the daughter of Thor-stan the Red. She was the
mother of Gre-lad [Gre-liath], whom Thor-fin Scull-cleaver had to wife.

After that Aud went out to seek Iceland. She had on board with her
twenty freedmen.

3. There was a man whose name was Coll, the son of Wether-grim,
the son of Ase the herse. He had the command with Aud, and was held
in greatest esteem by her. Coll had to wife Thor-gerd, daughter of
Thor-stan the Red.

4. Erp [Welsh Yrp] was the name of a freedman of Aud's. He was the son
of earl Meldun [Mael-duine] of Scotland, who fell before earl Sigrod
the Mighty, the mother of Myr-giol [Muir-gheal], daughter of Glio-mal
[Gleo-mael], king of the Irish. Earl Sigrod took them as booty,
and made slaves of them. Muir-gheal was bondmaid to the earl's wife,
and served her faithfully. She was cunning in many things. She took
care of the lady's or queen's [Sigrod's wife] unborn [posthumous]
child while she was in the bath [read, in bonds?]. Afterwards Aud
bought her at a high price, and promised her her freedom if she would
serve Thor-rid, the wife of Thor-stan the Red, as she had served her
lady. Muir-gheal and Erp, her son, went to Iceland with Aud.

5. Aud went first to the Fareys, and there gave in marriage Olof,
daughter of Thor-stan the Red, whence the Gate-beardies come.

6. After that she set out to seek Iceland, and came ashore at
Pumice-links or Lava-links, and was wrecked there. She went to
Keel-ness to Helgi Beolan, her brother. He bade her stay with him, and
half her company with her; but she thought that was but a mean offer,
and said that he was a poor fellow as he had always been. She then went
west to Broad-frith to her brother Beorn. He came to meet her with
his house-carles; for he said he knew his sister's proud heart, and
he bade her to his house with all her men; and she accepted this offer.

7. Afterwards in the spring, Aud and her company went into
Broad-frith to explore the land. They took their day meal at a
place north [so S, but MS. south] of Broad-frith, which is now called
Day-meal-ness. Afterwards they went inland through the island channels,
and landed at the ness, where also Aud lost her comb, and this ness
she called Comb-ness.

8. Aud took in settlement all the Dale-lands [here falls in the
second blank in H; see Introduction], at the inward of the friths,
from Day-meal-ness to Scram-leap-water. She dwelt at Hwam, on
the Trout-water-oyce, at a place called Aud's-tofts. She had her
prayer-place or oratory at Cross-hillocks. There she had crosses set
up, for she was baptized and of the true faith. Her kinsmen afterwards
used to hold these hillocks holy, and a barrow or high-place was
made there when sacrifices began. They believed that they should die
into these hillocks; and there was Thord-Gelle buried, ere that his
sons succeeded to the chieftaincy [after him], as it is told in the
history of him [Thord-Gelli's Saga].


15. 1. Aud gave land to her shipmates and freedmen.

2. Cetil [Cathal] was the name of a man to whom she gave land from
Scram-leap-water to Haurd-dale-water. He dwelt at Cetil-stead. He was
the father of West-lide, and of Einar, the father of Clamp-iron, and of
Thor-beorn, whom Styr slew, and of Thor-dis, the mother of Thor-gest.

3. Haurd was the name of a shipmate of Aud. To him she gave
Haurd-dale. His son was As-beorn, who had to wife Thor-borg, the
daughter of Mid-frith Sceg. Their children were Hnace, who had to
wife Thor-gerd, daughter of Thor-gar Scar-cheek, and Inge-borg,
whom Illuge the Black had to wife. [Blank for a line.]

4. Wivil or Weevil was the name of a freedman of Aud's. He asked
her why she did not give him a homestead as she had to others. But
she said that it did not matter, because he would always be held a
gentleman wherever he was. She gave him Weevil's-dale. There he dwelt,
and had a feud with Haurd. The son of Weevil was Thor-beorn, the father
of Gud-rid, whom Thor-stan, the son of Eiric the Red, had to wife
[part of line missing, which probably ran], 'and afterwards Thor-fin
Man-promise.' [Later add.] From him are the bishops come--Beorn,
Thor-lac, Brand.

Another son of Weevil's was Thor-gar, who had to wife Arn-ora, the
daughter of Lon-Einar. Their daughter was Yngw-held, whom Thor-stan,
the son of Snorre gode, had to wife.

5. Hound [Cu] was the name of a freedman of Aud's, a Scottish man. To
him she gave Hound-dale, and there he dwelt a long while.

6. Sunk-wolf was the name of a freedman of Aud's. To him she gave
Sunk-wolf-dale. He dwelt at Broad-bowster, and many a man is come
from him.

7. To Erp [Welsh Yrp], the son of earl Mel-dun [Mael-duin], who was
spoken of above, Aud gave his freedom and Sheep-fells-land. From him
the Erp-lings are come. Worm was the name of a son of Erp's. Another
was called Gund-beorn, the father of Arn-thora, whom Col-beorn,
Thord's son, had to wife. The third, As-gar, the father of Thor-orna,
whom Summer-lide Hramp's son, had to wife. A daughter of Erp's was
Hall-dis, whom Alf-a-Dale had to wife. Duf-nall [Dubh-nall] was yet
another son of Erp's. He was the father of Thor-kell, the father of
Shelty [the Shetlander], the father of Beine. Scate was yet another
son of Erp's. He was the father of Thord, the father of Gisle, the
father of Thor-gerd.

8. Thor-beorn was the name of a man that dwelt at Mere in
Hawk-dale. He had to wife [blank of half a line], and their daughter
was Hall-frid, whom Hos-coll of Lax-water-dale had to wife. They had
many children. Bard or Barrod was their son, and Thor-lac, the father
of Bolle, who had to wife Gud-run, Os-wif's daughter. Their sons were
these: Thor-lac and Hos-coll, Swart and Bolle; Her-dis and Thor-gerd
were their daughters.

Thord, Ing-unn's son, was Gud-run's first husband, and their children
were Thord Cat and Arn-katla or Erne-katla.

Thor-kell, Ey-wolf's son, was Gud-run's third and last husband. Their
children were Gelle and Riupa [Caper-cailzie].

Bard, Hos-coll's son, was the father of Hall-borg, whom Hall, the son
of Slaughter-Styr, had to wife. Hall-gerd Turn-breech was a daughter
of Hos-coll, and [also] Thor-gerd and Thur-rid.

9. There was a man whose name was Coll, the son of Wether-Grim. He
took in settlement all Lax-water-dale all up to Hawk-dale-water. He
was called Coll o' the Dales. He had to wife Thor-gerd, daughter of
Thor-stan the Red. Their children were these: Hos-coll and Gruoch,
whom We-laf the Old had to wife, and Thor-katla, whom Thorgar-gode
had to wife. Hos-coll had to wife Hall-frid, the daughter of
Thor-beorn of Mere. Thor-lac was their son. He had to wife Thor-rid,
the daughter of Arn-beorn, the son of Sleight Beorn. Their son
was Bolle. Hos-coll bought Mel-corca [Mael-....], the daughter of
Myr-ceartan [Muir-certach], king of the Irish. Their sons were Anlaf
Peacock and Helge. Hos-coll's daughters were Thor-rid and Thor-gerd,
and Hall-gerd Turn-breech. An-laf had to wife Thor-gerd, daughter of
Egil Bald Grimsson. Their sons were Ceartan and Hall-dor, Stan-thor
and Thor-berg. The daughters of An-laf were Thor-rid, Thor-berg the
Fat, and Berg-thora. Ceartan had to wife Raven, the daughter of As-gar
Eider-duck. Their sons were As-gar and Scum.

9. b. The scribe of S has here skipped a whole §, which we have put
in from Laxdæla, but not translated here.

10. Here-wolf, the son of Eywind Eld, afterwards had to wife Thor-gerd,
daughter of Thor-stan the Red. Their son was Hrut or Ram. To him
Hos-coll paid, as his heritage from his mother, Cam-ness-land, between
Hawk-dale-water and the Ridge which goes from the fell down to the
sea. Ram dwelt at Ram-stead. He had to wife Hall-weig, the daughter
of Thor-grim of Thick-shaw, the sister of Arn-mod the Old. They had
many children. Their son was Thor-kell, the father of Hall-dora,
the mother of Gud-laug, the father of Thor-dis, the mother of Thord,
[add.] the father of Sturla of Hwam. Grim was the son of Ram and
Mar, Endride and Stan, Thor-leot and Eor-wend, Thor-kell, Stan-grim,
Thor-berg, Atle, Arnor, Mar, Car, Cugalde; and daughters Berg-thora,
Stan-unn, Riupa [Caper-cailzie], Finna, Ast-rid.

11. Aud gave Thor-hild, daughter of Thor-stan the Red, to wife to
Ey-stan Mein-fret, the son of Alf of Osta. Their son was Thord or
Thor-rod, the father of Colban, the father of Thord the poet, and
of Alf-a-Dale. He had to wife Hall-dis, the daughter of Erp. Their
son was Snorre, the father of Thor-gils Halla's son. The daughters of
Alf-a-Dale were these: Thor-gerd, whom Are Mar's son had to wife, and
Thor-elfa, whom Ha-were, the son of Einar, the son of Clepp or Clemp,
had to wife. Their son was Thor-gar. Thor-wolf fox was also a son of
Ey-stan's. He fell at Thing-ness-moot in the company of Thord Gelle,
when he and Ord o' Tongue fought. Hrapp was the name of the fourth
son of Ey-stan.

12. Aud gave Osc, Thor-stan's daughter, to Hall-stan-gode to
wife. Their son was Thor-stan Surt [blank].

13. Aud gave Wig-dis, Thor-stan's daughter, Campa-Grim to wife. Their
daughter [was] Arn-borg or Erne-borg, whom As-wolf Flose of Head had
to wife. Their children were Ord, and Wig-dis, whom Thor-gar Cadall's
son [pr. Cathal's son] had to wife.

14. Aud brought up Anlaf-feilan, the son of Thor-stan the Red. He took
to wife Al-dis, the Barrey woman [Barra in the Hebrides], the daughter
of Conal, the son of Stan-mod, the son of Aulwe Bairn-carle. The son
of Conal was Stan-mod, the father of Hall-dora, whom Eilif, son of
Cetil One-hand, had to wife.

Their [viz. An-laf and Al-dis'] children were Thord-Gelle and Thora. [A
blank here, though none in MS., but it can be filled up as follows
from the text as given in Laxdæla Saga, thus:] Thord-Gelle had to wife
Hrod-ny, the daughter of Mid-frith Sceg. Their sons were Ey-wolf the
Grey, Thor-arin Fyls-enni, and Thor-kell Cog.

Ey-wolf the Grey had to wife..... Their sons were Thor-kell [Ari the
historian's great-grandfather] and Balework....

Thor-arin Fyls-enni had to wife Frid-gerd, the daughter of Thord
of Head. Their son was Sceg or Beardie [and their daughter Wig-dis,
whom Raven Limerick-farer had to wife.

Thor-kell Cog had to wife Thor-rid, the daughter of As-gar
Eider-duck. Their son was Thor-stan,.....]

Thora was the daughter of Anlaf Feilan, whom Thor-stan Torsk-biter,
the son of Thor-wolf Moster-beardie, had to wife. She was the mother
of Thor-grim, father of Snorre-gode, and of Borc the Fat, and of Mar,
Hall-ward's son. Ingiold and Grim were [other] sons of Anlaf Feilan.

Wig-dis was the name of the second daughter of Anlaf
Feilan. [..........]

Helga was the name of the third daughter of Anlaf [Feilan]. Gun-here,
Hlif's son, had her to wife. Their daughter was Iofrid, whom Thor-ord,
the son of Ord o' Tongue, had to wife, and afterwards Thor-stan,
Egil's son. Thor-unn or Thor-wen was another daughter of Gun-here,
whom Her-stan, Blund-ketil's son, had to wife. Red and Haugud or
Haug-wandel were the sons of Gun-here.

Thor-rid was the name of the fourth daughter of Anlaf
Feilan. Thor-arin, Rage's brother, had her to wife. Their daughter
was Wig-dis, whom Stan Thor-arin's son of Red-mell had to wife.

15. Aud was a worshipful lady. When she was well stricken in years,
she bade to her house her kinsmen and sons-in-law, and prepared a
costly feast for them. And when three nights of the feast were gone,
then she gave gifts to her kinsfolk, and counselled them wise counsels;
and she said that the feast should last other three nights, declaring
that this should be her funeral feast or arval. The next night she
died, and was buried on the shore, below high-water mark, as she had
ordered it herself; for she did not wish to lie in unhallowed ground,
seeing that she was a baptized woman. But after this the faith of
her kinsfolk went wrong [i.e. they turned heathens].


16. 1. Ceallac was the name of a man who was the son of Beorn the
Strong, the brother of Gib-leach, whom Beorn the Eastron had to
wife. Ceallac went out to Iceland, and took land in settlement
from Dæg-meal-ness to Clovening, and dwelt at Ceallac-stead. His
sons were Helgi Roe and Thor-grim Tangle, under Fell; Eilif Prude
[Brude], As-beorn Vodve of Ara-stead, Beorn Whale-maw of Toun-garth,
Thor-stan Thynning, Gizar Glad of Scorra-wick, Thor-beorn Scro Fod
of Cetil-stead; but his daughter was Asa of Swiney, the mother of
Ey-wolf and Tin-forna [Tin...].

2. Leot-wolf was the name of a freedman of Ceallac; Ceallac gave
him a homestead at Leot-wolf-stead, inside Cold-cheek-[hill]. His
sons were Thor-stan, and Beorn, and Hrafse. He was of giant-race on
the mother's side. Leot-wolf was an iron-smith. They went out into
Fell-shaw by Leot-wolf-stead, and Weevil, a friend of theirs, who
dwelt at Weevil's-toft. Thor-unn of Thor-und's-toft was the mother of
Ord-mere and the foster-mother of Ceallac the son of Beorn Whale-maw.

Olof, the daughter of Thor-grim under Fell, became possessed with
frenzy. Men charged Rafse with having brought about this, but he
[Rafse] took Ord-mere in her bed, who told him that he was the cause
of it. Then Thor-grim gave him Feud-isle. Rafse said that he would
smite Ord-mere upon her unless he gave the island in ransom; but
Ceallac would not part with the island. Rafse took their boat out of
a turven ship-shed. Ceallac's sons went after them, and could not get
up to them, upon which Eilif and his brothers attacked Hrafse in the
island. [The text is here all broken up, and unintelligible.] Beorn
Whale-maw slew Beorn, Leot-wolf's son, at the games. Leot-wolf and
his son bribed Ord-mere that he should bring Beorn, Ceallac's son,
within their reach. Ceallac the boy [Beorn's son] tripped along
with him [his father], and he [Beorn] was not overcome till they
caught the boy. They slew Ceallac [the boy] at Ceallac's-hillock;
he was then seven years old. After this Ceallac's sons set upon
Leot-wolf and Thor-stan [father and son] in the underground house
[Ir. úaim éleaid] at Fell-shaw; and Eilif found the other outlet,
and thus got behind them and slew them both.

M: Hrafse went indoors at Ara-stead, when Ceallac was sitting over
against the fire at a feast. Hrafse was in woman's clothes. He cut
at Ceallac, but he cast his shield over him, and his arm broke, but
he was not wounded. Hrafse went out by a door that was in the wall,
and slew As-beorn, and then got away. The sons of Ceallac bought over
Thord, Weevil's son, to bring Hrafse within their reach. He told Hrafse
that his ox was lying in a pit. Thord was carrying his shield for him,
and when he saw Ceallac's sons, he cast away the shield over to them;
upon which Hrafse grappled with Thord and cast him over the cliff,
and that was the death of him. Then Ceallac's sons did not get the
better of him till they knocked him down with long poles. Eilif sat
by while they overcame him. [Here the great blank ends in H.]


17. 1. Heor-laf, king of the Hords, who was called the man of Quin [the
county], had to wife Asa the Light. Their son was Utryg or Untrow, the
father of U-blaud, the father of Hagene the White, the father of Wolf
the Squinting. The second son of Heor-laf was king Half [Heah-wolf],
that commanded the Champions o' Half. His mother was Hilda the Slender,
the daughter of Hagene of Niard-ey. King Half was the father of king
Heor, who avenged his father upon Solwe, Hagene's son.

2. King Heor harried in the land of the Bearms [Perms]. There he took
as his booty Liu-wine, the daughter of the king of the Bearms. She
was left behind in Roga-land, while king Heor went forth to war;
and it was then that she bore two sons, the one called Gar-mund, the
other Heah-mund. They were very dark. At the same time her bondwoman
bore a son; he was called Laf, the son of Shag-hood the thrall. Laf
was white of skin, wherefore the queen changed children with the
bond-woman, and took Laf as her own. But when the king came home,
he did not like Laf, saying that he was puny. Next time the king went
off on a wicking voyage, the queen asked Brage the poet to her house,
and bade him to see what he thought of the boys. They were at that
time three winters old. She shut them up in the hall with Bragi,
and hid herself in the daïs. Bragi repeated these words:--



    Twain are here whom I trust well,
    Heah-mund and Gar-mund, Heor's children;
    But Laf the third, Shag-hood's son,
    A bondwoman bore him: no greater craven will there be.


                [See Corpus Poet. Bor. i. 360, No. 15.]


He struck with his staff the daïs where the queen was. When the king
came home she told him this, and showed him her own sons. He said he
had never seen such Hell-skins, and both brothers were ever afterwards
so called.

3. Gar-mund Hell-skin was a host-king. He used to harry west on wicking
cruises, and he had a kingdom in Roga-land. But at the time when he
left off the way of warfare in which he had long been, king Harold
Fairhair had fought a battle in Hafr's-frith against Eiric, king of the
Hords, and Sulce, king of Roga-land, and Ceotwa the Wealthy, and had
gotten the victory, and laid all Roga-land under himself, and drove
out therefrom many men away from their heritage. And Gar-mund could
see no way to get any honour there; wherefore he took counsel to go
out to Iceland. On the voyage with him were Wolf-squint, his cousin,
and Stan-wolf the Low, the son of Hrod-wolf the herse or lord of Agd,
and of Andott sister of Aulwe Bairn-carle.

Gar-mund and Wolf and Stan-wolf kept company at sea, each commanding
his own ship. They made Broad-frith, and lay off Ellida-ey, and then
they heard that the south of the frith was settled; but the west
part little or not at all. Gar-mund put in to Middle-fell-strand,
and took land in settlement from Fa-ban's-river to Cloven-stone. He
landed at Gar-mund's-voe, and stayed the first winter at Booth-dale.

Stan-wolf took land in settlement from Cloven-stone, and Wolf on the
west of the frith, as shall be told.

Gar-mund thought his settlement too small. He kept up a great estate,
and many men about him, so that he had eighty freedmen. He dwelt at
Gar-mund-stead, under Sheard [Pass].

4. There was a man called Throwend Slim-leg. He went out to Iceland
with Gar-mund Hell-skin. His race came out of Agd.

Throwend took in settlement the islands to the west of
Bearney-floe, and dwelt at Flat-ey. He had to wife the daughter
of Gils Galley-neb. Their son was Her-gils Napp-raz, who dwelt in
Hergils-ey. The daughter of Her-gils was Thor-katla, whom Mar of
Reek-hillock had to wife. Her-gils had to wife Thor-erna, the daughter
of Cetil Broad-sole. Ingiald was their son. He dwelt at Hergils-ey,
and sheltered Gisle, Sour's son; for which Borc the Fat got the
islands from him by law; but he bought Lither in Torsk-frith. His
son was Thor-arin, that had to wife Thor-gerd, the daughter of Glum,
Gara's son; and their son was Helga Stan-here. Thor-arin was with
Ceartan in Swine-dale when he fell.

5. Throwend Slim-leg was dwelling in Flat-ey when Ord-scraute
[pie-bald] and Thore, his son, came out to Iceland. They took land in
settlement in Torsk-frith. Ord dwelt at Shaw; but Thore went abroad
again, and was a warring. He won much gold in Fin-mark. With him was
the son of Hall of Temple-stead. And when they came to Iceland Hall
summoned him over the gold, and there arose great feuds over it,
wherefrom the History of the Torsk-frith-folk is made.

Gold Thore dwelt at Thore-stead and was a very mighty man of valour. He
had to wife Inge-borg, the daughter of Gils Galley-neb. Their son
was Gud-mund.

6. Gar-mund went westward to the Strands, and took land in settlement
from Gull-peak west to the Horn, and thence east to Stream-ness. There
he set up four homesteads: one in Ethel-wick, which his reeve looked
after: another in Cearan's-wick, which Cearan, his thrall, took care
of: the third at the West-commons, which his thrall Beorn took care of;
which Beorn was outlawed for sheep-stealing when Gar-mund was dead and
gone, and his property was taken as a fine and made Commons: a fourth
homestead Gar-mund had at Bard's-wick, which Atle, his thrall, took
care of, and he had twelve thralls under him. And when Gar-mund went
about between his homesteads, he always had eighty men with him. He
was very wealthy in chattels, and also in live stock. Men say that
his swine walked in Swine-ness, and his sheep on Herd-ness, and he
had his shielings at Bitter. Some say that he had also a homestead in
Shiel-river-dale at Gar-mund's-stead in Stan-grim's-frith. Wise men say
that he was the most nobly-born of all the settlers in Iceland. But
he had little feud or war with other men, because he was old when
he came to Iceland. Ceallac and he had a quarrel over the land that
lies between Cloven-ing and Faban's-river. Both wished to have it,
but Gar-mund had the best of it. Beorn the Eastron, and West-here of
Eyre, set them at one. West-here landed in West-here's-ness when he
went to meet Gar-mund.

Gar-mund hid much treasure in Duck-pit under Sheard. He had to wife
Here-rid, daughter of Geat, Geat-ric's son, the open-handed. Their
daughter was Yr [     ?     ], whom Cetil [Cathal] had to wife. Their
sons were Thor-hall and Orde, father of Hall-were, whom Borc, the
son of Thor-mod, Thiost-here's son, had to wife.

But afterward Gar-mund had to wife Thor-catla, daughter of U-fey,
Thor-wolf's son. Their children were Gar-rid and [blank in MS. for
name].

Gar-mund died at Gar-mund-stead, and there he is howed in a ship in
a wood there, a little way out from the house.

Gar-mund gave Hrod-wolf, Ceallac's son, his friend, a homestead at
Ballar-water. His sons were Illuge the Red, and Solwe, the father
of Thord.


18. 1. Stan-wolf the Low, the son of Hrod-wolf, the herse of Agd, took
land in settlement inward up from Cloven-stone to Grit-field-mull,
and dwelt in Fair-dale at Stan-wolf's-shelf. He walked inland, then
up on to a mountain, and saw inland there a great dale all grown with
wood. He could perceive one clearing in the dale; and there he built
him a homestead, and called it Sower-by; for it was very swampy, and
he called the whole dale by that name--Sower-by. It is now called
Turf-ness where the homestead was made. Stan-wolf had to wife Erny
[ ? ], Thidrand's daughter. Thor-stan the franklin was their son,
and Ern-dis the Wealthy was their daughter, the mother of Thord, the
father of Thor-gerd, whom Ord had to wife. Their son was Raven the
Hlymrec-farer [Limerick-farer], who had to wife Wig-dis, daughter of
Thor-arin Fyls-enni. Their son was Snort, the father of Iodis, whom
Ey-wolf, Hall-beorn's son, had to wife. Their daughter was Halla,
whom Atle, Tanne's son, had to wife. Their daughter was Yng-unn,
whom Snorre, Hun-bow's son, had to wife.

Stan-wolf lost three swine, and they were found two winters later in
Swine-dale, and they were then thirty together.

Stan-wolf also took in settlement Stan-wolf's-dale in Crook's-frith.

2. There was a man called Sleight-Beorn. He had to wife Thor-rid, the
daughter of Stan-wolf the Low. He took in settlement by Stan-wolf's
rede the West-dale in Sower-by.  He dwelt at Slight Beorn-stead, up
above Thwart-fell. His son was Theod-ric, that had to wife Arn-gerd,
daughter of Thor-beorn, Shield-beorn's son. Their son was Slaughter
Sturla, who set up a homestead at Stead-hillock; and [also] Cnot, the
father of As-gar, and Thor-beorn, and Theod-ric, after whom the borg or
bury is called on Coll-frith's-heath. Theod-ric, Sleight Beorn's son,
thought it was too crowded in Sower-by; so he went off to Ice-frith,
whence comes the History of Thor-beorn and Ha-ward the Halt.

3. An-laf Bag, whom Worm the Slim drove abroad out of An-laf's-wick,
took in settlement Bag-dale, and dwelt in Bag-stead, before Theod-ric
and his fellows drove him away. Then he took land in settlement inland
from Grit-field-mull, and dwelt at An-laf-dale. His son was Thor-wald,
who, by reason of an action for sheep-stealing brought by Thor-arin
Giallandi [  ?  ], gave it over by covenant to Og-mund, Wala-Stan's
son, wherefore Thor-arin slew Og-mund at the Torsk-frith's moot.

4. Gils Galley-neb took in settlement Gils-frith, between Anlaf's-dale
and Crook's-frith-mull. He dwelt at Cliffs. His son was Hedin, the
father of Hall-dor, the Garp-dale gode, the father of Thor-wald of
Garp's-dale, who had to wife Gud-run, Os-wif's daughter.

5. Thor-arin Crook took in settlement Crook's-frith up to Hafr-fell
[He-goat-fell] from Crook-frith's-ness. He had a feud with Stan-wolf
the Low over Stan-wolf's-dale, and rowed after him with twenty [ten]
men as he was going away from his shielings with seven men. They fought
by Fair-dale-water-mouth on the eyre; and while they were fighting
there came men up from the house to help Stan-wolf; and Thor-arin Crook
fell there and four of his men, and seven of Stan-wolf's men. Their
barrows are there.

6. Cetil Broad-sole took in settlement Bear-frith. He was the son of
Thor-beorn Talcni [gills]. His daughter was Thor-arna, whom Her-gils
Hnapp-raz had to wife; as it is written before.

7. Throw-end Slim-leg had to wife the daughter of Gils
Galley-neb. Their daughter was Thor-arna, whom Hrod-wolf, the son
of Helge the Lean, had to wife. Thor-berg Cog-breast was another
daughter of Gils Galley-neb. Here-fin was the name of his son, and
he dwelt in Crook's-frith.


19. 1. Wolf Squint, the son of Hagene the White, took in settlement all
Reek-ness between Torsk-frith and Hafr-fell. He had to wife Borg, the
daughter of Ey-wind Eastron, the sister of Helge the Lean. Their son
was Atle the Red, who had to wife Thor-berg, the sister of Stan-wolf
the Low. Their son was Mar of Reek-hillock, who had to wife Thor-katla,
the daughter of Her-gils Hnapp-raz. Their son was Are.

2. He was drifted by the sea to White-man-land, which some call
Great Ireland. It lies west of the main [ocean], near Wine-land the
Good. It is said to be six days' sail west from Ireland. Are could
not get away from there, and he was baptized there. The first who
told this story was Raven the Limerick-farer, who had long been in
Limerick in Ireland. Thor-kell Gelleson said that an Icelander told
[him] that he had heard from Thor-fin, earl in the Orkneys, that Are
had been recognised in White-man-land, but could not get away thence,
although he was held in great esteem there.

3. Are had to wife Thor-gerd, daughter of Alf-a-Dale. Their son was
Thor-gils, and [also] Guth-laf and Illugi. This is the family of
the Reek-ness-folk.

4. Iorund or Eor-wend was the name of a son of Wolf Squint. He had
to wife Thor-berg Cog-breast. Their daughter was Theod-hild, whom
Eric the Red had to wife. Their son was Laf the Lucky of Greenland.

5. Iorund or Eor-wend was the name of a son of Atle the Red. He had
to wife Thor-dis, daughter of Thor-gar Seethe. Their daughter was
Ord-katla, whom Thor-gils Coll's son had to wife. Iorund was the
father of Snorre.


20. 1. Hall-stan, the son of Thor-wolf Moster-beardie, took in
settlement Torsk-frith-strand, and dwelt at Hall-stan-ness. He
sacrificed to Thunder for him to send him a pair of porch-pillars, and
offered his son therefore; and afterward there came a tree [drifted
ashore] to his land that was 60 [MS. 63] ells long and two fathoms
thick. It was used for porch-pillars, and there were made out of it
porch-pillars for every homestead in the Thwart-friths. The place is
now called Pine-tree-ness where this tree came ashore.

Hall-stan had harried in Scotland, and there he took the thralls
which he brought out to Iceland. He sent them to salt-working in the
Sweveneys. There Hall-stan's thralls had ... [corrupt, and something
missing; the thralls ran away, and he came upon them sleeping and
slew them].

Hall-stan had to wife Osc, the daughter of Thor-stan the
Red. Their son was Thor-stan Swart, who discovered the Summer-Eking
[intercalation]. Thor-stan Swart had to wife [blank]. Their son was
Thor-arin, and their daughters Thor-dis, whom Thor-kell Trefil had
to wife, and Osc, whom Stan the far-sailor had to wife. Thor-stan
White was the name of their son. Sam [Saomi, i.e. Fin] was the son
of Thor-stan Swart, a bastard. He had a feud with Trefil over the
heritage of Thor-stan, because he [Trefil] tried to get hold of the
heritage for Thor-arin's children.

2. Thor-beorn Loke was the name of a man, the son of Bead-mod of
Scut. He went to Iceland, and took in settlement Deep-frith and
Gruoch-ness, up to Gowe-frith. His son was Thor-gils of Thor-gils-stead
in Deep-frith, the father of Coll, who had to wife Thor-rid, the
daughter of Thore, the son of earl Hallad, the son of Rogn-wald earl
of More. Their son was Thor-gils, who had to wife Ot-katla, daughter
of Ear-wend, the son of Atle the Red. Their son was Iorund. He had
to wife Hall-weig, the daughter of Ord, the son of Yra and Cetil
Gowe. Snorre was a son of Iorund, who had to wife Asny, daughter of
Slaughter-Sturla. Their son was Gils, who had to wife Thor-dis, the
daughter of Gud-laug and of Thor-katla, the daughter of Hall-dor,
the son of Snorre gode; but the son of Gils was Thord, that had to
wife Wig-dis, Swerting's daughter.

3. Cetil Gowe [Cathal Gobhan] was the name of a man who was the son
of Aurlyg, the son of Bead-were, the son of Wig-stark. Aurlyg had to
wife Signy, Oblaud's [Un-blate] daughter, the sister of Hagene the
White. Cetil their son came out late in the times of the Settlement. He
had been west on wicking cruises, and had gotten Irish thralls in
Ireland. The one was called Thor-mod [Diarmaid]; the second Floce;
the others Core and Swart [Dubh], and two named Score. Cetil took in
settlement Walrus-ness, and abode there the first winter at Gowe-hall,
but when the spring came he went inward to a ness, and abode there
at Gowe-ness the second winter.

Score the elder and Floce ran away with two women and much
chattels. They were in hiding in Score's-holt; but they were slain
in Floce-dale and Score-dale.

4. Cetil found no place for a homestead in the Ness, but went east
into Borg-frith, and abode the third winter at Gowe-hall. Early in
the spring he went east into Broad-frith to seek him a place for a
homestead; and there he stayed at Gar-mund-stead, and asked for Yra,
the daughter of Gar-mund, to wife, and took her to wife. And then
Gar-mund showed Cetil land west of the Frith.

5. Cetil's thralls ran away out of Snow-fells-ness, and reached
Lamb-stead in the dead of the night. Thord, the son of Thor-gar Lambe
and of Thor-dis, the daughter of Ynga-here, the sister of Egil, Scald
Grim's son, was living there at that time. The thralls set fire to
the house, and burnt to death Thord and all his household. Moreover
they broke into an out-house or store-house there, and took out great
stores of money and chattels, and got the horses home and loaded them
with their packs, and turned up the path to Elfet's-ness. Lambe the
Strong, the son of Thord, was coming back from the Moot early the
next morning, just after they had got away. He set out after them,
and his men with him; but when the thralls perceived this, they ran
every man his own way. Cetil and his men took Core in Core's-ness,
and some took to swimming. They caught Swart [Dubh] on Swart's-reef,
and Score in Scor-ey, and Thor-mod [Diarmaid] on Thor-mod's-reef,
a mile from land.

6. Cetil-Gowe took in settlement Gowe-frith and Hall-ness up to
Coll-frith. Cetil and Yra had two sons; one was Thor-hall, the father
of Hall-ware, whom Borc, the son of Thor-mod, Thiost-here's son, had
to wife; and another was Orde, who had to wife Thor-laug, daughter
of Hrod-wolf of Ballar-water, and Thor-rid, daughter of Wal-theow,
the son of Aur-lyg of Eisa-berg.

7. Coll O' Temple, the son of Hrod-wald, took in settlement
Coll's-frith and Quigand-ness and Quigand-frith, and sold his
settlement to divers men; but he went into Lax-water-dale to
Hos-Coll-stead. He was called Coll-a-Dale. His son was Hos-Coll, who
had to wife Hall-frid, the daughter of Beorn, who took Beorn-frith in
settlement to the north of Stan-grim's-frith. Their son was Thor-laic,
father of the Bolle that had to wife Os-wif's daughter, Gud-run.

8. Cniuc, the son of Thor-wolf Sparrow, was called Cniuc o' the
Nesses. He took in settlement all the ness to Bard's-strand from
Quigand-frith, and dwelt at [blank]. He had to wife Eya [Ewia],
the daughter of Ingi-ald, the son of Helge the Lean. Their children
were Einar, the father of Stan-wolf Birting, the father of Sal-gerd,
the mother of Bard the Black; and Ey-wolf, who was step-father of
Thor-borg Coal-brow, the daughter of Glum, whom Thor-mod made verses
on. Thor-grim was also Ey-wolf's son, the father of Yngw-hild, whom
Wolf-hedin of Wood-moor had to wife, and Thora, the mother of Cniuc o'
Mires in Deer-frith. He was the father of Thor-geat, the father of
Stan-wolf, the father of Thor-kel [lat. add.], the father of Halla,
the mother of Stein-unn, the mother of Raven, Swegen-Beorn's son,
and of Her-dis, that Hall Gizor's son, the Law-speaker, had to wife.

S: Another son of Cniuc's was Einar, the father of Stan-wolf, the
father of Sal-gerd, the mother of Bard the Black. Thora was the name
of Cniuc's daughter, whom Thor-wald, the son of Thord Wicking's son,
had to wife. Their son was Cniuc o' Mires, the father of Thor-geat,
the father of Stan-wolf, the father of Halla, the mother of Stein-unn,
the mother of Raven of Eyre. Cniuc had to wife Evia, daughter of
Ingiald, the son of Helge the Lean. Their son was Ey-wolf, the
father of Thor-grim, Catla's son. Grim had Catla to wife first, and
their daughter was Thor-borg Coal-brow, whom Thor-mod made verses
on. Stan-grim was the name of Thor-grim's son; he was the father of
Yngw-hild, whom Wolf-hedin of Wood-moor had to wife.

9. Gar-stan Cealce [jaw-bone] took in settlement Cealce's-frith
and Herd-ness, by counsel or rede of Cniuc. His son was Thor-gils,
the father of Stan the Danish, [lat. add.] the father of Wig-dis,
the mother of Thor-unn, the mother of Thor-gar, the father of abbot
Thor-fin.

S: His [Cealce's] son was Thor-gils, who had to wife Thora, the
daughter of West-here of Eyre. Their son was Stan the Danish. He
had to wife Hall-gerd, the daughter of Arn-ulf, the son of Arn-mod
the Red. Arn-ulf had to wife Wig-dis, the daughter of [space of ten
letters]. Wig-dis was the name of the daughter of Stan the Danish
and of Hall-gerd, whom Illuge, Stan-beorn's son, had to wife. Their
daughter was Thor-unn, the mother of Thor-gar Long-head.


21. 1. Gar-laf, the son of Eiric, the son of Hagene the White, took
in settlement Bard-strand, between Water-frith and Berg-lithe. He was
father of Ord-laf and of Helge Scarf. Ord-laf was the father of Guest
the Sage, and of Thor-stan, and of Asa, whom Thor-gils, the son of
Grim of Grim-ness, had to wife. Their sons were Ior-wend of Mid-eng
and Thor-arin of Bur-fell. The children of Guest were these: Thord
and Halla, whom Snorre, the son of Alf-a-Dale, had to wife. Their son
was Thor-gils. Another daughter of Guest's was Thor-ey, whom Thor-gils
had to wife. Thor-arin was their son, the father of Iodis, the mother
of Illuge, the father of Birna, the mother of Arn-thoror and Ey-wind.

Gar-laf had to wife Iora, the daughter of Helge. The third son of
Gar-laf was called Thor-fin. He had to wife Gud-run, the daughter of
As-wolf. Thor-stan, Ord-laf's son, was the father of Is-gerd, whom
Bale-werk, the son of Ey-wolf the Grey, had to wife. Their son was
Gelle the Law-speaker. We-ny was yet another daughter of Thor-stan. She
was the mother of Thord Crow-neb. Thence the Crow-neblings are come.

S: Helge Scrap was the father of Thor-borg, the mother of Katla, whom
Thor-stan, Sal-mund's son, had to wife. Their sons were Ref [Fox] of
Brynie-dale, and Thord, the father of Illuge, the father of Hrod-ny,
whom Thor-grim Burner had to wife.

Thor-dis was the name of another daughter of Helge Scrap. Thor-stan,
As-beorn's son of Kirkby in the East, had her to wife. Their son was
Swart, the father of Sigh-wat the Law-speaker. Gar-laf had to wife
Iora, Helge's daughter. Thor-fin was the name of the third son of
Gar-laf. He had to wife Gud-run, As-wolf's daughter. As-mund was the
name of their son. He had to wife Hall-catla, the daughter of Beorn,
the son of Mar, the son of As-mund. Hlenne was the name of their
son. He had to wife Egi-leiva, the daughter of Thor-stan, Crapla's
son. Their son was Thor-fin, the father of Thor-gar Long-head.

2. M: Groa [Gruoch] the Christian was the daughter of Gar-laf,
the mother of Helge, the father of Os-wif, the father of Gud-run,
the mother of Bolle, the father of Her-dis, the mother of Codran.

3. Arn-mod the Red, Thor-beorn's son, the foster-brother or sworn
brother of Gar-laf, took in settlement Red-sand. His sons were these:
Ern-ulf and Thor-beorn, the father of Hrod-wolf the Red-sand-man.

4. Thor-wolf Sparrow came out with Aurlyg, and took in settlement
Patrick's-frith on the west, and Wick on the west of Bard, save
Colfs-wick, where Coll, Aurlyg's sworn brother, dwelt. Thor-wolf
also took in settlement Kevel-wick to the south of Bard, and dwelt at
Whale-lair. Cniuc o' Nesses, and Ing-wolf the Strong, and Gar-theow
were the sons of Thor-wolf Sparrow. Thor-arna, whom Thor-stan,
Ord-laf's son, had to wife, was a daughter of Ing-wolf's.

5. Thor-beorn Talcne and Thor-beorn Scuma, sons of Bead-were
Bladder-pate, came out to Iceland with Aurlyg. They took in settlement
half Patrick's-frith and all Talcne-frith to Cub-ness.

6. Cetil Broad-sole, the son of Thor-beorn Talcne, took in settlement
all the dales from Cub-ness to Dufan's-dale. He gave Thor-erna his
daughter to Her-gils Hnapp-raz. Then Cetil went south into Broad-frith,
and took in settlement Bear-frith beside Reek-ness.


22. 1. Erne was the name of a nobleman. He was a kinsman of Gar-mand
Hell-skin. He came out from Roga-land because of the oppression
of king Harold. He took in settlement all Erne-frith. He abode at
Tilt-ness through the winter, because the sun did not set in the
short days there.

2. An Red-cloak, the son of Grim Hairy-chin of Ravenist, and the
son of Helga, the daughter of An the Bow-swayer, fell out with king
Harold Fairhair, and therefore he went out of the country west on a
wicking cruise. He harried in Ireland, and took to wife there Grelad
[Gré-liath], the daughter of earl Beart-mar [Great-deed?]. He and his
wife went to Iceland, and put into Arne-frith a winter later than
Erne. An stayed the first winter in Dufan's-dale. Grelad thought
the earth smelt bad there. Erne got news of High-mund Hell-skin,
his kinsman, north in Ey-frith, and yearned to go thither. So he
sold An Red-cloak all his land between Lang-ness and Steep, and he
set up a homestead at Eyre; and there Grelad thought she could smell
the honey in the grass.

3. Dufan [Dubhan] was a [thrall] freedman or thrall of An's. He gave
him Dufan's-dale. Beart-mar was the son of An, and the father of the
two We-guests and of Helge, the father of Thor-rid, the mother of
Arn-katla, whom Helge, Ey-wolf's son, had to wife. Thor-hild was a
daughter of Beart-mar, whom We-stan, Wegar's son, had to wife. Ead
or Aud and We-stan were their children.

4. Heallcar [Ealcmhar?] was a freedman of An's. His son was Beorn,
Beart-mar's thrall. Beart-mar gave Beorn his freedom; then he grew
rich. We-gest had a quarrel with him over it, and thrust a spear
through him; but Beorn dealt him his death blow with a spade.

5. Gar-theow, Wal-theow's son, further took in settlement
land in Erne-frith, Force-frith, Reek-frith, Trostan's-frith,
Gar-theow's-frith, and all up to Lang-ness, and dwelt in
Gar-theow's-frith. He had to wife Sal-gerd, daughter of Wolf
Squint. Their son was Hagene, the father of Atle, the father of
Hos-Coll, the father of Atle, the father of Bard the Swarthy,
[lat. add.] the father of Swegen-Beorn, the father of Raven, the
father of Stein-unn, the mother of sir Raven.

S: Their son was Hagene. He had to wife Aud or Ead, the daughter of
An-laf Even-Coll and of Thora, Gund-stan's daughter. Atle was their
son. He had to wife Thor-rid, the daughter of Thor-laf, the son of
Ey-wind Cnee and Thor-rid Ram-sow. Thor-laf had to wife Gro [Gruoch],
the daughter of Thor-wolf Breech.

Hos-Coll was the son of Atle [and] the father of Bard the Swarthy.

6. Eiric was the name of a man that took in settlement Well-dale on
the south of Deer-frith and Sletta-ness to Steep in Erne-frith, and
up to the Upper Neck in Deer-frith. He was the father of Thor-kel,
the father of Thord, the father of Thor-kel, the father of Stein-wolf,
the father of Thord, [lat. add.] the father of Thor-leva, the mother of
Thora, the mother of Gud-mund Gris, who had to wife Sol-weig, daughter
of John Loptsson. Their children were Magnus gode and Thor-lac,
the father of bishop Arne and Thora, the mother of earl Gizor.

S: [lat. add.] Thor-laf was the mother of Liny, the mother of Cecilia,
the mother of Bard and of Thor-gerd, whom Beorn the English had to
wife. Their children were these: Arnis the abbot, and Thora, whom
Amund Thor-garsson had to wife.

7. We-stan, the son of We-gar, the brother of We-beorn the
Sogns-champion, took land in settlement between the Halses or Necks
in Deer-frith, and dwelt in Hawk-dale. He had to wife Thor-hild,
Beart-mar's daughter. Their children were We-stan and Aud.

8. Thor-beorn Sour came out when the land was all settled. We-stan
gave him half Hawk-dale. His children were these: Gisle, who had to
wife We-stan's daughter; and Thor-kell, that had to wife Sigrid,
Sleight-Beorn's daughter; and Are; and [daughter] Thor-dis, whom
Thor-grim, Thor-stan's son, had to wife. Their son was Snorre gode.

S: Afterwards Barc the Fat had Thor-dis to wife. Their daughter was
Thor-rid, whom Thor-beorn the Fat had to wife, and afterwards Thor-ord
the Tribute-buyer. Their son was Ceartan of Frod-water.


23. 1. Deer was the name of a man, a noble, that came out from
South-Moor to Iceland by the counsel of earl Rogn-wald. He took in
settlement Deer-frith, and dwelt at the Necks. His son was Raven,
that dwelt at Cetil's-eyre, the father of Thor-rid, whom We-stan,
We-stan's son, had to wife. Their sons were Berg and Helge.

2. Thord was the name of a man, the son of Wicking, whom most men
declare to have been the son of king Harold Fairhair. To him, Deer
gave land between Mound in Hialle-ness and Earth-fall-gill, and he
dwelt at All-weather. He had to wife Theod-hild, the daughter of
Ey-wind Easterling, and the sister of Helge the Lean. Their son was
Thor-kell Champion the Wealthy, who dwelt there afterwards. His sons
were Thord Left-hand and Ey-wolf, father of Gisle, who had to wife
Hall-gerd, daughter of Wer-mund the Slim. Their son was Brand, the
father of Gud-mund the priest of Herd-holt, the father of Magnus the
priest; and their daughter was Thora, whom Brand, Thor-hard's son,
had to wife. Their children were Stan-wor, the mother of Rand-weig,
the mother of Sea-hild, whom Gizer the bishop had to wife. Helgi
was the name of another son of Ey-wolf. His children were these:
Olaf and Gud-leva, whom Firth- or Fish-Fin had to wife.

Thor-wald the White was the name of another son of Thord-Wicking's
son. He had to wife Thora, Cniuc's daughter. Their son was Thord the
White or Left-hand, who had to wife As-dis, Thor-mod's daughter,
the mother of Wolf the Marshal or Staller. The daughter of Thord
Left-hand was Ord-catla [MS. Ott-katla], whom Sturla, Theod-rec's
son, had to wife. Their son was Thord, who had to wife Hallbera, the
daughter of Snorre gode. Asny was a daughter of Sturla, whom Snorri,
Iorund's son, had to wife. [Lat. add.] Their daughter was Thor-dis,
the mother of Hos-Coll the Leech, the father of Margaret, the mother
of abbot Thor-finn.

S: Cniuc o' the Nesses. Their son was Cniuc o' the Fens or Mires,
the father of Thor-geat, the father of Stan-wolf, who had to wife
Her-dis, Tinn's daughter. Their children were these: Thor-kell o'
Mire and Halla, whom Thord, Ord-laf's son, had to wife. Another son
of Thor-wald the White was Thord Left-hand, who had to wife As-dis,
the daughter of Thor-grim, Hardref's son. The mother of As-dis was
Rand-weig, the daughter of Grit-gard, earl of Lathe. As-dis was the
mother of Wolf the Staller, and the sister of Leot the Sage, and of
Hall-dis, whom Thor-beorn, Theod-rec's son, had to wife. The daughter
of her and of Thord Left-hand was Ott-katla, whom Sturla, Theod-rec's
son, had to wife. Their son was Thord, who had to wife Hall-bera, the
daughter of Snorre gode. Their daughter was Thor-rid, whom Haf-lide,
Mar's son, had to wife. Snorri was the son of Thord, Sturla's son,
who had to wife Ord-borg, the daughter of Grim, Lod-mund's son. Their
children were Fly-Grim and Hall-bera, whom Mac-Snorri had to wife. The
daughters of Sturla were six. One was Asny, whom Snorre, Iorund's son,
had to wife. Their daughter was Thor-dis, the mother of Hos-Coll the
Leech. The son of Snorre and As-ny was Gils, the father of Thord.

3. Ingiald, Bruni's son, took in settlement Ingiald's-sand, between
Shelf-ness and Un-fare [i. e. Impasse]. He was the father of Hardref,
the father of Thor-grim, the father of Leot the Sage (and his sisters),
as was written above.


24. 1. Leot the Sage dwelt at Ingold's-sand, the son of Thor-grim,
Hard-ref's son, but his mother was Rand-weig, the daughter of earl
Grit-gard. Thor-grim Gagar [hound] was the son of Leot. Hall-dis,
one of Leot's sisters, Thor-beorn Theod-ric's son had to wife;
and As-dis, Leot's other sister, Ospac Os-wif's son carried off,
for which crime Leot got Ospac outlawed. Wolf was the name of their
son. Leot brought him up.

2. Grim Quiver dwelt at Brink. His sons were these: Sigurd
and Thor-kell, manikins and small. Leot's foster-son was named
Thor-arin. Leot bought butcher's meat of Grim for twenty hundred,
and paid for them with a meadow watered by the brook that ran between
their lands, and was called Gersemi [Jewel]. Grim turned the brook
on his own meadow, and trenched through Leot's lands; and he brought
an action against him therefore, and there was anger between them.

Leot took up with an Eastman at Waddle, who had set his heart upon
As-dis. Guest Ord-lafsson came to a harvest-feast at Leot's. Thither
came Egil, Sibyl-stan's son, and prayed Guest to give him some helping
counsel, whereby his father might be lightened of the deadly grief
that he was in for his son Ag-mund. [Something missing.] Guest made
the beginning of The Praise of Ag-mund. [See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 62,
ll. 17-20.]

Leot asked Guest what kind of man Thor-grim Gagar [hound] would turn
out. Guest answered that his foster-son Thor-arin would be the most
famous man; and he bade Thor-arin to take care, lest the hair that lay
on his tongue should coil about his head. Leot thought these slighting
words; but next morning he asked what was to come to Thor-grim. Guest
said that Wolf, his sister's son [Wolf the Staller], would be the
more famous man. Then Leot grew wroth; but yet he rode out and put
Guest on his way, and asked him, 'What will be my death?' Guest said
that he could not forestall his doom, but bade him keep on good terms
with his neighbours. Leot asked, 'Shall these earth-lice, the sons
of Grim-Quiver, be the death of me?' 'Sore bites the starving louse,'
quoth Guest. 'Where will it be?' asked Leot. 'Near here,' said Guest.

The Eastman was helping Guest up to the Heath, and holding him steady
on his horse, and the horse stumbled under him. Then said Guest,
'A piece of luck hath befallen thee now, and very soon another shall
befall thee; but take heed that it turn not to thy unluck.' The Eastman
found buried money, upon which he went home, and took twenty pennies
of it, and meant to go and fetch the rest later; but when he sought
for it again, he could not find it; but Leot caught him as he was
digging, and made him pay 300 for every penny [he had found].

That harvest-tide Thor-beorn, Theod-ric's son, was slain.

In the spring Leot was sitting on a mound watching his thralls at work;
he was in a cloak, and the hood thereof was strung about his neck,
and one sleeve on. The sons of Quiver sprang up on the hillock,
and both cut at him together, and after that Thor-kell pulled the
hood over his head. Leot said they were wicked neighbours; and they
tumbled off the hillock on to the path by which Guest had ridden, and
there Leot died. The sons of Grim went to Haward the Halts. Ey-wolf
the Gray and Stan-grim his son sheltered them [438].

3. Hall-ward Sougher was in battle against king Harold at
Hafrs-frith. He came from Shielings in Hæreda-land to Iceland, and
took in settlement Sougher-frith and Hall-wick as far as Stig [Sty],
and dwelt there.

4. Ean-wend, Wicking's son, the brother of Thord of Al-weather,
took in settlement all Ean-wend's-frith, and dwelt at Eyre.

5. Thurid or Thor-rid Sound-filler, and Sibyl-stan, her son, came from
Haleygo-land to Iceland, and took in settlement Waterlogs-wick, and
dwelt at Water-ness. She was called Sound-filler, because she wrought
by spells in a famine in Haleygo-land, that every sound should be full
of herring. She also established the Fold-bank in Ice-frith-deep, and
took for so doing an humble ewe from every franklin in Ice-frith. The
sons of Sibyl-Stan were Ag-mund and Egil.

6. Helge was the name of a man, the son of Hrod-wolf of Peak-fell. He
was of Upland kin, on his mother's side, and there he grew up. He
came to Iceland by the wish of his kinsmen. He put into Ey-frith,
but it was by that time all settled; and with that he wished to go
back to Norway, but he was driven back to Sougher-frith. He stayed
through the winter there with Hall-ward, and in the spring he went
forth to seek him a place for a homestead. He discovered a frith,
and hit upon a harpoon lying on the tide-mark [between high and
low water marks], and called the place Harpoon-frith, and there he
afterwards settled. His son was Thor-stan the Luckless. He went abroad,
and slew a henchman of earl Hacon, Grit-gard's son; but Ey-wind, the
earl's counsellor, sent him to We-beorn, the Trust-of-the-Sogners,
for shelter. He took him in, though We-dis, his sister, dissuaded
him from doing so. For this cause We-beorn sold his lands and went
to Iceland, because he was not strong enough to keep the man.

7. Thor-wolf, Bræce's son, took in settlement part of Harpoon-frith
and Hall-wick, and dwelt there.

8. Ean-wend Knee came from Agd to Iceland with Thu-rid Rum-gylt,
his wife. They took in settlement Elfet's-frith and Cook-place-frith,
and dwelt there. Their son was Thor-laf, who was spoken of before, and
Wal-brand, the father of Hall-grim and of Gun-nere, and of Bearg-ey,
whom Haward Halt had to wife. Their son was An-laf.


25. 1. Gar was the name of a nobleman in Sogn. He was called
We-gar [Weoh-gar], for he was a great sacrificer. He had many
children. We-beorn, the Sogners' champion, was his eldest son, and
[further] We-stan and We-thorm and We-mund and We-gest and Weth-erne,
and We-dis his daughter. After the death of We-gar, We-beorn was at
odds with earl Hacon, as was spoken of before. The brothers and their
sister came to Iceland. They had a hard and long passage out. At
harvest-tide they made Lathe-wick west of Horn.

Then We-beorn made a great sacrifice, saying that earl Hacon was
making a sacrifice that day to their destruction. But when he was at
his sacrifice, his brothers egged him to go to sea; and they paid no
heed to the sacrifice, and put to sea. That same day their ship was
wrecked under great cliffs in a gale, and they hardly got up the cliff
[and saved themselves]; and the first to get up was We-beorn. It is
now called the Sogners-cliff. But through the winter, Atle of Fleet,
the thrall of Gar-mund Hell-skin, took and kept them all at his house,
and would take no pay for their guesting, saying that Gar-mund did not
lack meat. But when Atle went to Gar-mund, Gar-mund asked him how he
was so bold as to take and keep such men at his cost. Atle answered,
'Because it shall be known, as long as Iceland is inhabited, how
great an estate that man must have kept up, when one of his thralls
dared to do such a thing without asking his leave.' Gar-mund answered,
'For this thing that thou hast done thou shalt receive thy freedom,
and the homestead that thou wast reeve over.' And Atle afterward
became a man of substance.

2. In the spring We-beorn took in settlement land between Scate-frith
and Horse-frith, as far as a man could walk in a day, and that piece
over which is called Foal-fort.

We-beorn was a great fighting man, and there is a great history
of him. He gave his sister We-dis in wedlock to Grim-wolf of
Unad's-dale. They fell into quarrel, and We-beorn slew him hard by
Grim-wolf's-mere, wherefore We-beorn was slain at Theng-eyre-moot in
Deer-frith, and three men beside.


26. 1. Gund-stan and Hall-dor were the names of the sons of that
Gund-beorn after whom Gund-beorn's-reef is called. Gund-beorn was the
son of Wolf-crow. They took in settlement Scate-frith, and Bath-dale,
and Wash-wick up to Slim-frith. Berse was the son of Hall-dor, and
the father of Thor-mod, Coal-brow's poet. There in Bath-dale dwelt
afterwards Thor-beorn, Theod-rec's son, who slew An-laf, the son of
Haward the Halt and of Bearg-ey, Wal-brand's daughter, whereof is
made the History of the Ice-frith-folk and the Slaughter of Thor-beorn.

2. Snow-beorn, the son of Ey-wind the East-man, the brother of
Helge the Lean, took land in settlement between Slim-frith and
Lang-dale-water, and dwelt at Water-frith. His son was Holm-stan,
the father of Snow-beorn-Galte [boar], who slew Hall-beorn, Ord's son,
at Kid-rock, hard by Hall-beorn's-ward or Hall-beorn's-cairn. He had
before slain Hall-gerd, his wife, the daughter of Ord o' Tongue.

[According to Hawk's directions now followeth.]

The mother of Snow-beorn Boar was Ceol-ware, and they were first
cousins [on the sister side] of Ord o' Tongue. Snow-beorn was fostered
at Thing-ness with Thor-ord; but sometimes he would be with Ord o'
Tongue or his mother.

3. Hall-beorn, the son of Ord of Kid-rock, the son of Hall-kel,
the brother of Cetil-beorn the Old, took to wife Hall-gerd, Ord o'
Tongue's daughter. They stayed with Ord the first winter [after their
marriage], and Snow-beorn Boar was there at the time.

There was little love between the husband and wife. Hall-beorn made
ready to depart by the flitting-days in the spring. But while he was
getting ready to go, Ord went from his house to bathe at Reek-holt,
where his sheep-house was, for he did not wish to be at home when
Hall-beorn went away, for he suspected that Hall-gerd would not be
willing to go away with him. Ord had ever been a peace-maker between
them. When Hall-beorn had saddled the horses, he went into the parlour
or bower, and there sat Hall-gerd on the daïs combing her hair. The
hair fell all over her and down on the floor, for she had the best
hair of any woman that have ever been in Iceland (save Hall-gerd
Long-breeks). Hall-beorn bade her stand up and come. She sat still
and held her peace. Then he took hold of her, but she would not stir;
and this happened three times. Then Hall-beorn stood up in front of
her, and said [this verse]:--


    The linen-veiled lady lets me stand as a beggar, etc.


                [See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 79.]


He twisted her hair round his hand, and tried to drag her off the
daïs, but she sat still, and never budged a whit the more. Then
he drew his sword, and hewed off her head. Then he walked out
and rode away. There were three men with him, and they had two
pack-horses. There were few folk at home, and news was sent at
once to Ord. Says Ord, 'Go tell Snow-beorn at Ceol-ware-stead,
for I will not ride after them.' Snow-beorn rode after them with
twelve men; but when Hall-beorn's men saw men riding after them,
they prayed Hall-beorn to ride off, but he would not. Snow-beorn
and his men came up with them at the hillocks that are now called
Hall-beorn's-cairns. Hall-beorn and his men went up on the hillocks,
and defended themselves therefrom. There fell four [three] men of
Snow-beorn's, and both Hall-beorn's companions. Then Snow-beorn
hewed the foot off Hall-beorn at the ankle; then he hobbled into the
southernmost hillock, and there he slew two more men ere he fell. There
are three cairns on the hill there, but five on the other. Upon which
Snow-beorn went back.

[Here something is missing. Snow-beorn was no doubt sought to be
outlawed by the kinsmen of Hall-beorn, hence he determines to go
abroad.]

4. Snow-beorn had a ship in Grim's-river-oyce, and Hrod-wolf of
Red-sand bought half of her. There were twelve men with each of
them. With Snow-beorn were Thor-kell and Summer-lid, the sons of
Thor-gar the Red, the son of Einar the Staf-holting. Snow-beorn took
with him Thor-ord of Thing-ness, his foster-son, and his wife; and
Hrod-wolf took Styr-beorn, who made this verse after his dream:--


    The bane I see of both of us
    (It is dreary all) north-west in the main:
    Frost and cold, horrors of all kinds:
    I see Snow-beorn slain by treason.


                [See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 361, No. 20.]


They went forth to seek Gund-beorn's-reef, and discovered the
land. Snow-beorn would not explore the land in the night. Styr-beorn
went ashore, and found a bag of money in a cairn, and hid
it. Snow-beorn struck him senseless with an ax, and the bag fell
down. They made a hall, and it was all covered with snow. Thor-kell,
the son of Red, found water on a fork, which was pushed out at the
hall-luffer; that was in Goe [c. Feb. 10-March 10]. Then they dug
themselves out. Snow-beorn repaired the ship; but Thor-ord and his wife
were at the hall on his behalf; and Styr-beorn and his men on behalf
of Hrod-wolf; and the others were out hunting and fishing. Styr-beorn
slew Thor-ord; and Hrod-wolf and he together slew Snow-beorn. Red's
sons and all the others swore oaths to them to save their own lives.

They made Heleygo-land, and thence came to Iceland, and put in at
Waddle. Thor-kell Trefil guessed what had happened to the sons of
Red. Hrod-wolf built a work or fort on Strand-heath. Thor-kell Trefil
sent Swegenung to take the head of Hrod-wolf [to slay him]. He went
first to Her-mund at Mire; then to Anlaf at the Drongs; then to Guest
at Hayes. He sent him to his friend Hrod-wolf. Swegenung slew Hrod-wolf
and Styr-beorn; then he went to Hayes.

Guest exchanged sword and ax with him, and lent him two horses,
white and black-maned, and sent a man to ride over Waddle as far
as Coll's-frith, to tell Thor-beorn the Strong to fetch back the
horses. He slew Swegenung at Swegenung's-eyre, because Swegenung's
sword broke off at the hilt. Trefil used to boast against Guest
wherever their wits were compared together, that he had out-witted
Guest when he made him send a man for the head of his own friend.

5. Anlaf Even-Coll took land in settlement from Lang-dale-water to
Sand-eyre-water, and dwelt at Unad's-dale. He had to wife Thor-rid
[S: Thora], Gund-stan's daughter. Their son was Grim-wolf, who had
We-dis to wife, the sister of We-beorn.

6. Thor-wolf Fast-holder was the name of a nobleman in Sogn. He
was at odds with earl Hacon, Grit-gard's son, and came to Iceland
[al. by the counsel of king Harold], and took land in settlement
there from Sand-eyre-water to Giantess-step-water in Raven's-frith,
and dwelt at Snow-fells. His son was Un-fey, the father of [al. who
had to wife] Ot-katla.


27. 1. Aur-lyg [was] the son of Bead-were Wig-stark's son [O' S
...?]. He came to Iceland by reason of the oppression of king Harold
Fairhair, and stayed the first winter with Gar-mund Hell-skin. But in
the spring Gar-mund gave him a place for a homestead in Ethel-wick,
and the lands that appertained thereto. Aur-lyg had to wife Sig-ny,
daughter of Un-blate, sister of Hagene the White. Their son was Cetil
Gufa [Cathal Gobha], who had to wife Yra, Gar-mund's daughter. Aur-lyg
owned Sletta and Iockle-friths.

2. And now beginneth the tale of that Settlement of Gar-mund [which
was turned into commons], as was written before, as far as Stream-ness
from the east of Horn.


28. 1. Slate-beorn, the son of Her-fin and Halla, was a great
wicking. He was ever a foe of king Harold. He came to Iceland,
and put into Beorn's-frith with his ship, all set with shields;
and ever after he was called Beorn o' the Shields. He took land in
settlement from Stream-ness to Drong. He dwelt at Shield-Beorn-wick,
and had another homestead in Beorn's-ness, where are to be seen the
great foundation-marks of his hall. His son was Thor-beorn, the father
of Arn-gerd, whom Theod-rec, Sleight-Beorn's son, had to wife. Their
sons were Thor-beorn, and Sturla, and Theod-rec.

2. Gar-wolf was the name of a man that wrecked his ship on
Gar-wolf's-peak, and afterwards dwelt beneath this peak by the rede
or counsel of Beorn.

3. Thor-wald, the son of Os-wald [blank], the son of Wolf, the son of
Oxen-Thoro, took in settlement Drong-land and Drong-wick up to Eng-ness
[Meadow-ness or Hanger-ness], and dwelt at Drongs all his life. His
son was Eiric the Red, who settled Greenland, as is said before.

4. Here-rod Hwic-timber [al. White-sky] was a man of birth. He was
slain by the contrivance of king Harold; and his three sons came
to Iceland, and took land in settlement in the Strands--Ey-wind
Ey-wind's-frith, Un-fey Un-fey's-frith, and Ing-wolf Ing-wolf's-frith,
and there they dwelt afterwards.

5. Eiric-snare was the name of a man that took land in settlement from
Ing-wolf's-frith to Fish-lease and Bag o' Wood. He had to wife O-lof,
the daughter of Ing-wolf of Ing-wolf's-frith. Their son was Flose, that
dwelt at Wick, where the Eastmen wrecked their ship, and built another
ship out of the wreck, which was called Tree-bag or Bag o' Wood, on
board of which Flose set out to go abroad, but was driven back into
Ax-frith, whereby arose the History of Bead-mod Gerpe and Grim-wolf.


29. 1. Ean-wend Tree-foot, the son of Un-fey Barb-foot, the son
of Ing-were Beitel [Mare's tail, Equisetum]. Ean-wend was against
king Harold at Hafr's-frith, and lost his foot there. After that he
came to Iceland, and took in settlement land from Cliff to Un-fare,
Cold-back-wick, Colban's-wick, Burge's-wick, and dwelt at Cold-back
till his old age. He was the brother of God-borg, the mother of
God-brand Cula, the father of Asta, the mother of king Anlaf the
Saint. Ean-wend had four sons: one was Grette; another Thor-gar
Flask-back; a third Asgar Eider-duck, the father of Calf and of Raven,
whom Ceartan had to wife, and of Thor-rid, whom Thor-kel Cug had to
wife [first], but afterwards Stan-thor, the son of Anlaf Peacock, had
her to wife; and the fourth son of Ean-wend was Thor-grim Hoar-pate,
the father of Os-mund, the father of Grette the Strong.

2. Beorn was the name of a man that took in settlement Beorn-frith. He
had to wife Leva. Their son was Swan of Swan's-hill, and dwelt there
afterwards, and was drowned in the frith, and was seen to go into
the fell, i.e. Swan's-hill.

3. Stan-grim Troll took in settlement Stan-grim's-frith, and dwelt at
Troll-tongue. His son was Thore, the father of Hall-dor, the father
of Thor-wald Or-gode, the father of Ord of Bitter, the father of
Stan-thor, the father of Ord, the father of High-Snorre, the father
of Ord the monk, and of Thor-lac [S: Thor-hrolf] and Thor-arin Rosti
[Tosti].

4. Coll was the name of a man that took in settlement Coll's-frith
and Scridin's-brow, and dwelt under the Fell as long as he lived.

5. Thor-beorn Bitter was the name of a man that was a great wicking,
and a wicked man. He came to Iceland with his household, and
took in settlement the frith that is now called Bitter, and dwelt
there. Somewhat later Gud-laug, the brother of Gils Galley-neb,
wrecked his ship there on the west over against the headland that
is now called Gud-laug's-head. Gud-laug got ashore with his wife and
daughter, but all the other folk aboard were lost. There Thor-beorn
Bitter found them, and he murdered them both, and took the child and
brought her up. But when Gils Galley-neb was aware of this, he went
forth thither and avenged his brother, and slew Thor-beorn Bitter
and other men beside. Gud-laug's-wick is called after Gud-laug.


30. 1. Balce is the name of a man, the son of Clong, the son of
Sote of Sote's-ness. He was against king Harold at Hafr's-frith, and
after that he came to Iceland, and took in settlement all Ram-frith,
and dwelt at both Balce-steads, and afterwards at By, and there he
died. His son was Bearse God-leas [Temple-tenant?], who first dwelt
at Berse-stead in Ram-frith, but afterwards he took in settlement
Lang-mere-dale (as above is written); and they had another homestead
before he took to wife Thor-dis, the daughter of Thor-hard of Hot-dale,
and got Holm's-land as her portion. Their son was Arn-gar, the father
of Beorn the Hot-dale champion. Gar-borg was the daughter of Balce,
the mother of We-laf the Old.

2. Arn-dis the Wealthy, daughter of Stan-wolf the Low, afterwards
took land in settlement in Ram-frith out from Bord-eyre. She dwelt
at By. Her son was Thord, that dwelt before at Mull in Sower-by.

3. Greniad and Throst, the sons of Her-mund Holcin, took land in
settlement in Ram-frith inward from Bord-eyre, and dwelt at Mells. From
Greniad was come Horse-Gelle the priest, but from Throst came Orm. The
son of Throst was Thor-kell of Cears-eyre, the father of God-run,
whom Thor-beorn Thynna [ax], the son of Hrod-mund the Halt, had to
wife. They dwelt at Fair-brink. Thor-laf Hrod-mund's foster-son was
their son.

Heah-stan was the name of another son of Hrod-mund. They were all of
one mind. Thore was the name of a son of Thor-kell, Throst's son. He
dwelt at Mells. Helga was the name of his daughter.

4. At that time Sleight Helge came out to Bord-eyre, and Eor-wend
his brother. They were wickings. They all went to Mells; they were
twelve together without their servants. At that time Helge took to
wife Helga, Thore's daughter. Hrod-mund and his fellows lost a stud
of horses, and charged Helge and his fellows with it, and Mid-frith
Sceg summoned them to the All-Moot for theft; but Hrod-mund was to
watch over the district, and make a strong work or fort at Brink. The
Eastmen got ready their ship.

One morning it came to pass that a raven came on the luffer at Brink
and croaked shrilly. Then quoth Hrod-mund:--


    Outside I hear the raven in the morning:
    So in times of yore when kings were doomed they screamed.


                [See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 56, 57.]


Thor-beorn quoth--[repetition of same sentences in different words].

At that very time the Eastmen got into the work; for the workmen had
not shut the work after them. The brothers went forth [to fight]. The
women said that Hrod-mund was too old, and Thor-laf too young to
go forth [to fight]. Thor-laf was then 19 [15] winters old. He and
Hrod-mund ran out with their weapons, and Hrod-mund quoth:--



    My death day was not marked out for me to-day or yesterday.
    I care not though swords play on red shields.--[See Corpus
    Poet. Bor. ii. 57.]



Six Eastmen fell in the work, and the other six got away; but as
Thor-beorn was about to shut the work after them, Eor-wend hurled a
dart [atgar] through him. Thor-beorn took the dart out of the wound
and thrust it between Eor-wend's shoulders, so that it came out at his
breast, and they both fell dead to the earth. Helge caught up Eor-wend,
and cast him on his back, and so ran on. Heah-stan ran after them
till Helge cast him off his back, and then he turned back. Hrod-mund
had fallen, but Thor-laf was wounded to the death. The women asked
what had happened. Ha-stan quoth:--



    There are six wicking dead on the causeway.



The women asked how many there were. Heah-stan quoth:--



    There were four of us kinsmen against twelve sea-rovers.



The women asked how many had fallen of the wickings, and Heah-stan
quoth:--



    Seven of them have struck the earth with their noses:
    The greater half of them shall never launch their ship hence:
    We gave the peace-breakers little peace....
    There was a grim clatter of stone-casting, ere the sea-men turned
    on their heels:
    The carrion bird had his prey, when Sleight Helge got a red hood:
    They brought up from the ship white helmets, but they took away
    bloody pates.



Helge and his mates put to sea the same day, and were all lost aboard
Helge's ship off Scridin's-brow. Thor-laf was healed, and dwelt at
Brink, but Heah-stan went abroad and fell on the Long Serpent with
king Anlaf Tryggwason.

5. Now are written down the most of the Settlement in the
West-frith-folks' Quarter, according to what men of knowledge have
told. It may now be heard that this Quarter hath been largely settled
by men of rank, from whence are come many gentle families, as might
now have been heard.










LIB. III.


Nú hefr upp Land-naóm í Norðlendinga fiórðunge [439].

1. 1. Eysteinn Mein-fretr, son Alfs or Osto, nam Hrúta-fiarðar-straond
ena Eystre næst efter Balca, ok bió þar noekkora vetr, áðr hann fór
í Dala at bua, ok feck Þórhildar,10 dóttor Þórsteins Rauðs [440]:
þeirra syner vóro þeir Alfr í Daolom, Þórðr, ok Þórolfr, ok Hrappr.

2. Þóroddr hét maðr, es nam Hrúta-fiaorð [441], ok bió á
Þóroddz-staoðom: hans son vas Arnórr Hýnefr, es átte Gerðe, dóttor
Baoðvars or Baoðvars-hólom. Þeirra syner vóro þeir, Þórbiaorn, es15
Gretter vá, ok Þóroddr Draópo-stúfr, es orte Ofeigs-vísor [442],
faðer Valgerðar es átte Skegge, Gamla son, Þórðar sonar, Eyjolfs
sonar, [[169: iii. 1.]] Eyjars sonar, Þórhrolfs sonar Fasthallda
frá Snæfiaollom [son Skeggja Skammhondungs var Gamle, f. Alfdísar,
m. Oddz Munks] [443].


2. 1. Skautaðar-skegge [444] hét maðr ágætr í Norege. Hans son vas
Biaorn, es kallaðr vas Skinna-Biaorn;5 hann vas Holmgarðz-fare. Hann
fór til Íslannz, ok nam Mið­fiaorð, ok Línacra-dal. Hans son vas
Miðfiarðar-Skegge; hann vas [445] garpr mikill ok farmaðr [446].

2. Hann herjaðe í Austr-veg, ok lá í Danmaork við Sióland: hann vas
hlutaðr til at brióta haug Hrólfs konungs Kraka; ok tók10 hann þar or
Skofnung sverð Hrólfs, ok oexe Hiallta, ok miket fé annat. En hann
náðe eige Laufa; þvi at Baoðvarr vilde at hónom; en Hrólfr konungr
varðe hann [447].

3. Hann fór til Íslannz síðan, ok bió at Reykjom í Miðfirðe, ok
átte Hallbero Gríms dóttor. Syner Skeggja vóro þeir Eiðr,15 es átte
Hafþóro, dóttor Þórbergs Corna-múla, ok Álofar Elliða-skialldar,
systor Þórgeirs Gollnis. Þau aótto maorg baorn. Annarr son Skeggja vas
Collr, faðer Halldórs, faoðor þeirra Þórdísar, es Skálld-Helge átte,
ok Þórkotlo. Doettr Skeggja vóro þær Hróðný, es átte Þórðr Geller;
ok Þórbiaorg, es átte Ásbiaorn enn Auðge,20 Harðar son: dótter [448]
þeirra vas Ingibiaorg, es átte Illoge enn Svarte [[170: iii. I.]] á
Gils-backa: þeirra syner Gunnlaugr Orms-tunga, Hermundr, ok Ketill
[449].


3. 1. Haralldr Hringr hét maðr ætt-stórr.  Hann kom skipe síno í
Vestr-hóp, ok sat enn fyrsta vetr þar nær sem hann hafðe lent, ok
nú heita Hring-staðer [450]. Hann5 nam Vatz-nes allt útan [451] til
Ambáttar-ár fyr vestan, allt inn til Þver-ár, ok þar yfir af þvero
til Braga-óss, ok allt þeim-megin [452] Biarga út til sióvar, ok bió
at Hólom. Hans son vas Þórbrandr, faðer Ásbrannz, faoðor Solva ens
Prúða [453] á Ægis-síðo, ok Þórgeirs es bió at Hólom; hans dótter vas
Ástríðr, es átte Arnmóðr Héðins10 son. Héðinn vas son þeirra. Onnor
dótter Þórgeirs vas Þórgerðr, es átte Þórgrímr, son Petars frá Óse
[454].

2. Sóte hét maðr es nam Vestr-hóp, ok bió under Sóta-felle.


4. 1. hét iarl á Englande; hann átte Álofo, dóttor Ragnars Loðbrókar:
þeirra baorn vóro15 þau, Biaorn, faðer Auðunnar Skaokols; ok Eiríkr,
faðer Sigurðar Bióða-Skalla; ok Ísgerðr, es átte Þórer iarl á
Verma-lande.

Auðunn Skaokoll fór til Íslannz, ok nam Víðe-dal, ok bió á
Auðunnar-staoðom. Með hónom kom út Þórgils Giallande, félage
hans, faðer Þórarens Goða. Auðunn Skaokull vas faðer Þóro20 [[173:
iii. 2.]] Mos-hals, móðor Ulfilldar, es átte Goðbrandr Kúla; þeirra
dótter [455] Ásta, móðer Óláfs konungs ens Helga.... [456] Son
Auðunnar Skaokols vas Ásgeirr at Ásgeirs-aó; hann átte Iórunne, dóttor
Ingimundar ens Gamla. Þeirra baorn vóro þau, Þórvalldr, faðer Dollu,
móðor Gizorar byscops: ok Auðunn, faðer Ásgeirs, faoðor Auðunnar,5
faoðor Egils, es átte Ulfeiðe, dóttor Eyjolfs Goðmundar sonar [ok var
þeirra son Eyjolfr, es vegenn var á Alþinge, f. Orms capalíns Þorláks
byscops ens Helga]. Annarr son Auðunnar Skaokols vas Eysteinn, faðer
Þórsteins, faoðor Helga, faoðor Þórorms [f. Oddz, f. Hallbiarnar,
f. Sigvatz prestz]. Dótter Ásgeirs at Ásgeirs-aó vas10 Þórbiaorg
Boejar-bót [457].

2. Ormr hét maðr, es nam Orms-dal, ok bió þar. Hann vas faðer Oddz,
faoðor Þórvallz [458], faoðor Helga, faoðor Harra, faoðor Ióro,
móðor Þórdísar, móðor Tans [459], faoðor Skafta.


5. 1. Ketill Raumr hét herser ágætr í Raums-dale í15 Norege:
hann vas son Orms Skelja-mola, Hross-biarnar sonar, Raums sonar,
Iotun-biarnar sonar norðan or Norege [460]. Ketill átte Miollo,
dóttor Ánar Bogsveigiss. Þórsteinn hét son þeirra. Hann vá á skógenom
til Upplanda, af á-eggjon faoðor síns, Iaokul, son Ingimundar iarls
af Gautlande ok Vígdísar.20 [[173: iii. 2.]] Iaokull gaf hónom líf;
síðan feck Þórsteinn [461] Þórdísar systor hans.

Þeirra son vas Ingimundr enn Gamle. Hann vas foeddr í Hefni með Þóre,
faoðor Gríms ok Hrómundar: Heiðr volva spáðe þeim aollom at byggja á
því lande es þá vas úfundet vestr í haf; en5 Ingimundr kvezk við því
skyldo goera. Volvan kvað hann þat eige mondo mega; ok sagðe þat til
iartegna, at hlutr moendi hverfa or pússe hans [462], ok kvað hann þá
mundo finna es hann groefe fyrer aondoges-súlom sínom á landeno [463].

2. Ingimundr vas víkingr mikill, ok herjaðe í Vestr-víking [464].10
Sæmundr hét félage hans Suðreyskr. Þeir kvómo or hernaðe í þann
tíma es Haralldr konungr geck til lannz, ok [465] lagðe til orrosto
í Hafrs-firðe við þá Þóre Haklang. Ingimundr vilde veita konunge,
en Sæmundr eige; ok skilðe þar félag þeirra. Efter orrostona gifte
Haralldr konungr Ingimunde Vígdíse, dóttor Þóriss iarls15 Þegjanda. Þau
Iorundr Hals vóro friðlo-baorn hans. Ingimundr unðe hverge; því fýste
Haraldr konungr hann, at leita forlaga sínna til Íslannz: en Ingimundr
lézk þat eige ætlað hafa. En þó sende hann tvá Finna í ham-faorom til
Íslannz efter hlut sínom--Þat vas Freyr goerr af silfre--Finnarner kómo
aftr, ok haofðo fundet20 hlutenn, ok naóðo eige. Vísoðo þeir Ingimunde
[466] til í dale einom [[175: iii. 3.]] miðle holta þriggja [467], ok
saogðo hónom allt Iannz-leg hvé háttað vas þar es þeir skyldo byggja.

Efter þat fór Ingimundr til Íslannz, ok með hónom Iorundr Hals,
mágr hans, ok Eyvindr Soerkver, ok Ásmundr ok Hvate viner hans
[468]: ok þrælar hans, Friðmundr ok Baoðvarr ok Þórer5 Refskegg, ok
Ulfkell. Þeir tóko Grímsár-ós fyr sunnan land [469], ok vóro aller um
vettrenn á Hvann-eyre með Gríme fóst-bróðor Ingimundar. En um váret
fóro þeir norðr um heiðar. Þeir kómo í fiaorð þann es þeir fundo
hrúta tvá--þeir kaolloðo þar Hrúta-fiaorð--síðan fóro þeir norðr
um hérað, ok gaófo víða oer-nefne.10 Hann vas um vetr í Víðe-dale í
Ingimundar-holte. Þaðan saó þeir fiaoll snælaus [470] í land-suðr,
ok fóro þangat [471] um váret. Þar kende Ingimundr laond þau es hónom
vas til vísat. Þórdís, dótter hans vas alen í Þórdísar-holte.

3. Ingimundr nam Vatz-dal allan upp frá Helga-vatne ok15 Urðar-vatne
fyr austan. Hann bió at Hofe; ok fann hlut sínn es hann gróf fyr
aondogis-súlom sínom. Þórsteinn vas son þeirra Vígdísar; ok Iaokull;
ok Þórer Hafrs-þió; ok Haogne: Smiðr hét ambáttar son ok Ingimundar. En
doettr hans Iórunn, ok Þórdís.20

4. Iorundr Hals nam út frá Urðar-vatne, ok til Mógils-loekjar, ok
bió á Grund under Iorundar-felle. Hans son vas Márr á Márs-staoðom.

[[176: iii. 3.]]

5.  [472]Hvate nam út frá Mógils-loek til Gilj-ár, ok bió á
Hvata-staoðom.

6. Ásmundr nam út frá Helga-vatne of [473] Þingeyra-sveit, ok bió
under Gnúpe.

7. Friðmundr nam Forsoelo-dal.5

8. Eyvindr Soerkver nam Blaondo-dal. Hans son vas Hermundr, ok Hrómundr
enn Halte.

9. Ingimundr fann á vatne eino bero, ok tvá húna hvíta [474] með
henne;--þat kallaðe hann Húna-vatn. Efter þat fór Ingimundr útan,
ok gaf Haralde konunge dýren.--Ecke haofðo menn fyrr séð10 í Nórege
hvíta-biaorno--þá gaf Haraldr konungr Ingimunde skipet Stíganda með
viðar-farme, ok siglðe (hann) tveim skipom til Íslannz; ok siglðe
fyr norðan land [475] vestr um Skaga fyrstr manna, ok hélt upp í
Húna-vatn--þar heiter nú Stíganda-hróf hiá Þingeyrom.15

Efter þat vas Hrafn Austmaðr með Ingimunde, ok hafðe sverð gótt;
ok bar þat í hof. Því tók Ingimundr þat af hónom.

10. Hallormr ok Þórormr broeðr kómo út ok [476] váro með
Ingimunde. Þá feck Hallormr Þórdísar dóttor hans, ok fylgðe henne
heiman Cárns-ár-land. Þeirra son vas Þórgrímr Cárnsár-goðe.20 Þórormr
bió í Þórorms-tungo.

11. Ingimunde hurfo svín tio, ok fundosk annat hausteð í Svína-dale
[477] [[177: iii. 4.]] ok vóro þá saman hundrað svína. Gaoltr hét
Beigaðr; hann hlióp á Svína-vatn, ok svamm þar til at af gengo
klaufernar: hann sprack á Beigaðar-hvále.

12. Hrolleifr enn Mikle, ok Liót móðer hans, kómo út í
Borgar-firðe. Þau fóro norðr um sveiter, ok fengo oengan ráð-stafa
áðr5 þau kómo í Skaga-fiaorð til Sæmundar. Hrolleifr vas sonr Arnallz,
bróðor Sæmundar; því vísaðe hann þeim norðr á Haofða-straond til
Þórðar; en hann feck hónom (land) í Hrolleifs-dale, ok bió hann
þar. Hrolleifr fiflðe Hróðnýjo, dóttor Una í Unaðs-dale [478]. Oddr Una
son sat fyrer hónom, ok vá Liót systrung hans, en10 særðe hann á foete,
þvi at kyrtil hans bito eige iaorn. Hrolleifr vá Odd, ok tvá menn aðra;
en tveir kómosk undan. Fyrer þat goerðe Haofða-Þórðr þau héraðs-sek,
svá vítt sem vaotn féllo [479] til Skaga-fiarðar. Þá sende Sæmundr
Hrolleif tíl Ingimundar ens Gamla. Hann sette hann niðr í Oddz-ás
gegnt Hofe.15

Hann átte veiðe í Vatzdals-aó við Ingimund, ok skylde ganga or aó
fyrer Hofs-maonnom; en hann vilde eige or ganga fyrer [480] sonom
Ingimundar; ok baorðosk þeir um aóna. Þá vas sagt Ingimunde; ok vas
hann þá blindr; ok lét hann smala-svein leiða hest under ser á aóna
miðle þeirra. Hrolleifr skaut spióte í gegnom hann.20 Þeir fóro þá
heim. Ingimundr sende sveinenn at segja Hrolleife: [[179: iii. 4.]] en
hann vas dauðr í aonduge þá es syner hans kómo heim. Hrolleifr sagðe
móðor sínne: hon kvað þá reyna mundo hvárt meira mætte gifta Ingimundar
sona, eða kunnosta hennar; ok bað hann þá fyrst í braut fara. Þórsteinn
skylde reyna efter Hrolleife, ok hafa kost-grip af arfe. Eige settosk
þeir í aondoge [481] faoðor síns5 Ingimundar-syner. (Þeir) fóro norðr
til Geirmundar [482], ok gaf Þórsteinn hónom sex tige silfrs, at
hann skyte Hrolleife braut. Ingimundar-syner raokðo spor hans norðan
um halsa til Vatz-dals. Þórsteinn sende húskarl í Ás á niósn. Hann
kvað tolf vísor [483] áðr til dura vas genget. Hann sá fata-hrúgo á
braondom, ok kom10 undan rautt klæðe. Þórsteinn kvað þar vereð hafa
Hrolleif, 'ok mun Liót hafa blóteð til lang-lífiss hónom.' Þeir fóro
í Ás, ok vilde Þórsteinn sitja yfer durom; ok náðe því eige fyrer
Iaokle, þvi at hann vill þar vesa. Maðr geck út ok sásk [484] um;
þá leidde annarr Hrolleif efter ser. Iaokull brásk við, ok fellde
ofan skíða-hlaða;15 en gat þó kastað kefle til broeðra sínna. Hann
réð á Hrolleif, ok ulto þeir báðer ofan fyr breckona, ok varð Iaokull
efre. Þá kom Þórsteinn at, ok neytto þeir þá vápna. Þá vas Liót út
komen ok geck aofog; hon hafðe haofoðet miðle fóta ser; en klæðen á
bake ser. Iaokull hió haofoð af Hrolleife, ok rak í and-lit Liótu.20
Þá kvazk hon of sein orðet hafa; 'Nú moende um snuask iaorðen fyr
siónom mínom, en ér mundot aller oerzk hafa.'

[[184: iii. 5.]]

13. Efter þat kauss Þórsteinn Hofs-land; en Iaokull hafðe sverðet,
ok bió í Tungo. Þórer hafðe goðorð, ok bió at Undorn-felle [485],
ok geck berserks-gang. Haogne hafðe Stíganda, ok vas far-maðr. Smiðr
bió á Smiðs-staoðom. Þórsteinn átte Þórríðe Gyðjo, dóttor Solmundar
í Ásbiarnar-nese: þeirra son vas Ingolfr enn5 Fagre, ok Goðbrandr.
Iaokull vas son Bárðar Iaokuls sonar, es Óláfr konungr enn Helge lét
drepa.--Þat sagðe Iaokull stiga-maðr, at lenge mundo glap-víg haldask
í ætt þeirre.

14. Eyvindr Auðkúla hét maðr; hann nam Svína-dal ok bió á
Auðkúlo-staoðom.10

15. Þórgils Giallande bió at Svína-vatne, es út kom með Auðunne Skokul
[486]. Hans syner vóro þeir Digr-Ormr, es vaógo Skarp-heðin Véfroeðar
son í Vatz-skarðe.

16. Eyvindr Soerkver nam Blaondo-dal, sem fyrr es ritið [487]. Hans
son vas Hrómundr Hallte, es vá Haogna Ingimundar son, þá es15 þeir Márr
ok Ingimundar syner baorðosk um Deilðar-hialla: því vas hann goerr or
Norðlendinga-fiórðunge. Hans syner vóro þeir Þórbiaorn, ok Hásteinn,
es baorðosk við Sleito-Helga [488] í Hrúta-firðe. Annarr son Eyvindar
Soerkvess vas Hermundr, faðer Hildar, es átte Ávallde Ingiallz son:
þeirra baorn vóro þau Colfinna, es átte20 [[184: iii. 5.]] Gríss
Sæmings son; ok Brandr es vá Gallta Óttars son aó Húna-vatz-þinge
fyrer níð Hallfroeðar.

17. Þórbiaorn Colcan [489] hét maðr. Hann nam Colco-mýrar, ok bió
þar meðan hann lifðe [490].


6. 1. Ævarr [491] hét maðr, son Ketils Hello-flaga, ok Þóríðar,5 dóttor
Harallz konungs Goll-skeggs, or Sogne. Syner Ævars vóro þeir Véfroeðr
ok Carle, ok Þórbiaorn Strúgr, ok Þórðr Mikill Ævarr fór til Íslannz or
víking ok syner hans, aðrer an Véfroeðr, hann vas efter í víking. Með
hónom fór út Gunnsteinn frænde hans, ok Auðolfr, ok Gautr.10

Ævarr kom skipe síno í Blaondo-ós; þá vóro numen laond fyr vestan
Blaondo. Ævarr fór upp með Blaondo at leita ser land-náms, ok kom
þar sem heita Móbergs-breckor; sette hann (þar) [492] niðr staong
háva, ok kvazk þar taka Véfroeðe syne sínom bú-stað. Síðan nam hann
Langa-dal allan upp þaðan, ok svá þar fyr norðan hals.15 Þar skifte
hann laondom með skipverjom sínom. Ævarr bió í Ævars-skarðe.

2. Véfroeðr kom út síðarr í Gaongo-skarz-ár-ós, ok geck norðan til
faoðor síns; ok kende Ævarr hann eige. Þeir glímðo svá at upp gengo
stockar aller í húseno [493] áðr Véfroeðr sagðe til sín. Hann20
goerðe bú at Móberge sem ætlað vas: en Þórbiaoorn Strúgr á [[187:
iii. 6.]] Strúgs-staoðom: en Gunnsteinn á Gunnsteins-staoðom:
Carle á Carla-staoðom: Þórðr (Mikill) á Mikils-staoðom: Auðolfr
á Auðolfs-staoðom.

3. Gautr bygðe í Gautz-dale; hann vas einhendr. Þeir Eyvindr Soerkver
fóro ser sialfer, ok vildo eíge lifa efter Ingimund enn5 Gamla:
Haukr bió þar sem Hauks-staðer [494] heita. Véfroeðr átte Gunnhillde,
dóttor Eireks or Goðdaolom, systor Holmgaongo-Starra: þeirra syner vóro
þeir Ulfheðinn, es þeir Fostolfr ok Þróttolfr vaógo við Grinda-loek;
ok Skarpheðinn, es þeir Digr-Ormr vaógo í Vatz-skarðe; ok Húnroeðr,
faðor Márs, faoðor Hafliða.10

4. Hollte hét maðr, es nam Langa-dal ofan frá Móberge, ok bió
á Holta-staoðom.  Hann vas faðer Ísroeðar, faoðor Ísleifs, faoðor
Þórvallz, faoðor Þórarens (ens) Spaka. Dótter Þórvallz vas Þórdís,
es átte Halldórr, son Snorra Goða; þeirra doettr vóro þær Þórkatla,
es átte Goðlaugr Þórfinnz son í Straums-firðe. [Þaðan ero15 Sturlungar
komner ok Odda-verjar.] Onnor (dótter) vas Goðrún, es átte Ceartan, son
Ásgeirs í Vatz-firðe. Þeirra son Þórvalldr, faðer Þórðar í Vatz-firðe,
ok Ingeríðr, es Goðleifr prestr átte [495].

5. Holmgongo-Máne hét maðr, es nam Skaga-straond fyr vestan inn til
Fors-ár; en fyr austan til Mána-þúfo; ok bió í Mána-vík:20 hans dóttor
átte Þórbrandr í Daolom, faðer Mána, faoðor Kalfs skalldz.

6. Eilífr Orn hét maðr, son Atla, Skíða sonar ens Gamla, [[188:
iii. 6.]] Bárðar sonar í Ál: Eilífr nam land inn [496] frá Mána-þúfo
til Gongo-skarz-ár, ok Laxár-dal, ok bió þar. Hann átte Þórlaugo dóttor
Sæmundar í Hlíð: þeirra syner vóro þeir Solmundr, faðer Goðmundar,
faoðor (þeirra) Víga-Barða, ok broeðra hans [497]. Annarr vas Atle enn
Ramme, es átte Herdíse, dóttor Þórðar frá Haofða: þeirra5 baorn vóro
(þau) Þórlaug, es átte Goðmundr enn Ríke; ok Þórarenn, es átte Haollo,
dóttor Iorundar Hals; þeirra son vas Styrbiaorn, es átte Yngvillde,
dóttor Steinroeðar, Heðins sonar frá Heðins-haofða; þeirra dótter
Arndís, es átte Hamall, Þormóðs son, Þórkels sonar Mána. Son Eilífs
Arnar vas Coðran at Gilj-aó, faðer10 Þórvallz Víðfaorla; ok Þióðolfr
Goðe at Hofe á Skaga-straond; ok Eysteinn, faðer Þórvallz Tinteins,
ok Þórsteins Heiðmennings, ok Arnar í Fliótom [498].


7. 1. Sæmundr enn Suðreyske, félage Ingimundar ens Gamla, sem
ritið es: hann kom skipe síno í Gaongo-skarz-ár-ós.15 Sæmundr nam
Sæmundar-hlíð alla til Vatz-skarz fyr ofan Sæmundar-loek, ok bió á
Geirmundar-staoðom. Hans son vas Geirmundr, es þar bió síðan. Dótter
Sæmundar vas Regin-leif, es átte Þóroddr Hialmr: þeirra dótter
Hallbera, móðer Goðmundar ens Ríkja, faoðor Eyjolfs, faoðor Þóreyjar,
móðor Sæmundar [ens20 Fróða]. Arnalldr hét annarr son Sæmundar, faðer
Riúpo, es átte [[189: iii. 6.]] Þórgeirr, son Þórðar frá Haofða:
þeirra son vas Halldórr frá Hofe.

2. Skefill hét maðr, es skipe síno kom í Gaongo-skarz-ár-ós á enne
saomo viko ok Sæmundr.  En meðan Sæmundr fór elde um land-nám sétt,
þá nam Skefill land allt fyr útan Sauð-aó; hann tók5 þat af land-náme
Sæmundar at úlofe hans; ok let Sæmundr þat vesa svá buet.

3. Ulfliótr hét maðr; hann nam Langa-holt allt fyr neðan Sæmundar-loek.

4. Þórkell Vingner, Atla son, Skíða sonar ens Gamla; hann10 nam land um
Vatz-skarð allt, ok Svart-ár-dal. Hans son vas Arnmóðr enn Skiálge,
faðer Gallta, faoðor Þórgeirs, faoðor Styr­mess, faoðor Hallz,
faoðor Colfinno.

5. Alfgeirr hét maðr, es nam land um Alfgeirs-vaollo, ok upp til
Mæli-fellz-ár, ok bió á Alfgeirs-vaollom.15

6. Maðr het Þórviðr, sa es land nam upp frá Mæli-fellz-aó til Gilj-ár.

7. Hrosskell hét maðr, es nam Svartár-dal allan, ok Ýrar-fellz-laond
aoll með ráðe Eiriks. Hann nam ofan til Gil-haga; ok bió at
Ýrar-felle. Hann átte þræl þann es Roðrekr [499] hét; hann sende20
hann upp efter Mæli-fellz-dale í landa-leiton, suðr á Kiol. Hann kom
til gils þess es verðr suðr frá Mæli-fellz-dale, ok nú heiter [[190:
iii. 7.]] Rodreks-gil [500]; þar sette hann niðr staf ný-birkðan,
es þeir kaolloðo land-kaonnoð. Efter þat hvarf hann aftr.

8. Vékell enn Hamrame hét maðr, es land nam ofan frá Gilj-aó, til
Mæle-fellz-ár, ok bió at Mæle-felle. Hann spurðe [501] ferð Hroðreks
[502], ok fór lítlo síðarr suðr á fiall í landa-leiton. Hann kom til
hauga5 þeirra es nú heita Vékels-haugar; hann skaut miðle hauganna;
hann hvarf þaðan aftr.

En es þat spurðe Eirikr í Goðdaolom, sende hann þræl sínn suðr á
fiall, es hét Ronguðr; fór hann enn í landa-leit. Hann kom suðr til
Blondo kvísla; ok fór síðan upp með aó þeirre es fellr fyr10 vestan
Vinverja-dal, ok vestr á hraunet miðle Reykja-valla ok Kialar; ok
kom þar á mannz-spor, ok skilðe at þau laógo sunnan at. Hann hlóð
þar vaorðo þá, es nú heiter Rangaðar-varða. Þaðan fór hann aftr,
ok gaf Eirikr hónom frelse fyrer ferð sína. En þaðan af tókosk upp
ferðer um fiallet miðle Sunnlendinga [503] ok Norðlendinga.15


8. 1. Eirikr hét maðr ágætr. Hann fór af Norege til Íslannz. Hann vas
son Hroallz [504], Geirmundar sonar, Eiriks sonar Orðig-skeggia. Eirikr
nam land frá Gilj-aó, ok Goð-dala [505] ok ofan til Norðr-ár; ok bió
at Hofe í Goðdaolom. Hann20 átte Þórríðe, dóttor Þórðar Skeggja,
systor Helgo, es Ketilbiaorn [[192: iii. 7.]] enn Gamle átte at
Mosfelle. Baorn þeirra Eiriks vóro þau Þórkell, ok Hroalldr, Þórgeirr,
ok Holmgongo-Starre, ok Gunnilldr. Þórgeirr Eiriks son átte Yngvilde,
Þórgeirs dóttor: þeirra dótter Rannveig, es átte Biarne Brodd-Helga
son. Gunnillde Eiriks dóttor átte Vefroeðr Ævars son [506].5

2. Kraóko-Hreiðarr hét maðr, son Úfeigs [507] Laf-skeggs,
OExna-Þóres-sonar. Þeir feðgar bioggo skip sítt ok [508] siglðo
til Íslannz. Ok es þeir kómo í land-sýn, geck Hreiðarr til siglo; ok
kvazk eige mundu kasta aondogis-súlom sínom fyr borð; kvezk þat þykkja
úmerkilegt at goera ráð sítt efter því: kvezk heldr mundo heita [509]
á10 Þór, at hann vísaðe hónom til landa; ok kvazk þar mundu berjask
til landa ef [510] áðr vaore numet. En hann kom í Skaga-fiaorð,
ok siglðe upp á Borgar-sand til brotz. Hávarðr Hegre kom til hans,
ok bauð hónom til sin; ok þar vas hann um vettrenn í Hegranese.15

3. Um váret spurðe Hávarðr, hvat hann vilde ráða sínna; en hann kvezk
ætla at berjask við Sæmund til landa. En Hávarðr latte, ok kvað þat
ílla gefizk hafa; bað hann fara á fund Eiriks í Goðdaolom, 'ok tak raóð
af hónom, þvi at hann es vitrastr maðr í héraðe þesso. [511]' Hreiðarr
goerðe svá. En es hann fann Eirik,20 latte hann þessa ófriðar, ok kvað
úheyrt [512], at menn deilðe, meðan [[193: iii. 8.]] svá mann-fátt
være á, landeno; kvezk helldr vilja gefa hónom Tungona alla niðr frá
Skála-mýre, ok kvað Þór þangat hafa vísat hónom; ok þar hafa horft
á stafn [513] hans, es hann siglðe (upp) á Borgar-sand; kvað hónom
[514] oeret þat land-nám ok hans sonom. Þann kost þá [515] Hreiðarr,
ok bió á Steins-staoðom. Hann kauss at deyja5 í Mæli-fell. Hans son
vas Ófeigr Þunn-skeggr, faðer Biarnar, faoðor Tungo-Steins.

4. Maðr hét Hialmolfr, es nam land ofan um Blondo-hlíð. Hans
son vas Þórgrímr Cugge [516], faðer Oddz í Axlar-haga, faoðor
Sela-Kalfs.--Þaðan ero Axlhegingar.10

5. Onundr Vís hét maðr, es land nam upp frá Merki-gile, enn Eystra-dal
allt fyr austan. En þá es Eirikr vilde til fara at nema land um
dalenn allt fyr vestan [517], þá fellde Onundr blót-spaón til, at
hann skyllde verða víss [518], hvern tíma Eirikr moende til fara
at nema; ok varð þá Onundr skiótare; ok skaut tundr-aoro yfer aóna,
ok15 helgaðe ser svá landet fyr vestan; ok bió miðle á.

6. Cáre hét maðr, es nam land á miðle Norðr-ár ok Merki-gils; ok
bió í Flata-tungo.--Hann vas kallaðr Tungo-Cáre.--Frá hónom ero
Silfr-stoeðingar komner.

7. Þórbrandr Orrecr [519] nam land upp frá Bólstaðar-aó,
Silfra-staða-hlíð20 alla, ok Norðrár-dal fyr norðan, ok bió á
Þórbrannz-staoðom; [[194: iii. 8.]] ok lét þar goera elld-hús svá
mikit at aller þeir menn es þeim megin fóro um dalenn, skyldo þar
bera klyfjar í goegnom; ok vesa ollom matr heimoll.--Við hann es
kennd Orrecs-heiðr upp frá [520] Hoeko-staoðom. Hann vas gaofogr maðr
ok kyn-stórr.

8. Þórer [521] Dúfo-nef, vas leysinge OExna-Þóriss. Hann kom skipe5
síno í Gaongo-skarz-ár-ós. Þar vas bygt hérað allt fyr vestan;
hann fór norðr yfer Iaokols-aó at Land-brote, ok nam land miðle
Glóða-feykiss-ár ok Diúp-ár, ok bió á Flugo-mýre.

9. Í þann tíma (kom) út skip í Kolbeins-ár-óse, hlaðet kvik-fé. En
þeim hvarf í Brim-nes-skógom ung-hrysse eitt. En Þórer10 Dúfo-nef
keypte vónena, ok fann síðan [522]. Þat vas allra hrossa skiótast,
ok hét Fluga. Orn hét maðr, es fór lannz-horna í miðle; hann vas
fiaol-kunnegr; hann sat fyre Þóre í Vinverja-dale es hann skyllde
fara suðr of Kiaol; ok veðjaðe við Þóre, hvárr þeirra eiga moende
hross skiótara; þvi at hann átte all-góðan hest; ok lagðe15 hvárr
þeirra við hundrað silfrs. Þeir riðo báðer suðr um Kiaol, þar til
es þeir kómo á skeið þat es nú heiter Dúfo-ness-skeið. En eige
vas minne skiótleiks munr hrossa, an Þórer kom í móte Erne á miðjo
skeiðe. Orn unðe svá ílla við fé-lát sítt, at hann vilde eige lifa;
ok fór upp under Arnar-fell, ok týnde ser þar [523]; en Fluga stóð20
[[195: iii. 9.]] þar efter, þvi at hon vas miok móð. En es Þórer fór
af þinge, farm hann hest faoxóttan, grán hiá Flugo: við þeim hafðe
hon fenget. Under þeim vas alenn Eið-faxe, es útan vas foerðr [524],
ok varð siau manna bane við Miors [525] á eínom dege; ok lézk hann
sialfr þar. Fluga týndisk í fene á Flugo-mýre.5

10. Collsveinn enn Ramme hét maðr, es land nam á miðle Þver-ár ok
Gliúfr-ár ok bió á Collsveins-staoðom upp frá Þver-aó. Hann hafðe
blót á Hof-staoðom.

11. Gunnolfr [526] hét maðr. Hann nam land miðle, Þver-ár ok
Glóða-feykis-ár, ok bió í Hvamme.10


9. 1. Gormr hét herser ágætr í Svía-ríke [527]; hann átte Þóro, dóttor
Eiriks konungs at [528] Uppsaolom. Þorgils hét son hans [529]: hann
átte Elinu dóttor Burizlafs konongs or Gaorðom austan, ok Ingigerðar
[530], systor Dagstyggs Risa-konungs [531]. Syner þeirra vóro þeir
Hergrímr ok Herfiðr, es átte Hollo, dóttor Heðins, ok Arn-dísar15
Heðins dóttor. Groa hét dótter Herfinnz, ok Hollo; hána átte Róarr.

2. Þeirra son vas Slétto-Biorn, es land nam fyrst [532] miðle
Griót-ár ok Deilðar-ár, áðr þeir Healte ok Kolbeinn kómo út; hann bió á
Sletto-Biarnar-staoðom. Hans son vas [533] Ornolfr, es átte Þórliótu,20
[[196: iii. 10.]] dóttor Healta Skapls [534]; ok Arnbiaorn, es átte
Þórlaugo Þórðar dóttor frá Haofða; ok Arnoddr, es átte Þór-nýjo,
dóttor Sigmundar, Þórkels sonar es Glúmr vá. Arnfríðr hét dótter
Sletto-Biarnar, es Spak-Baoðvarr átte, son Ondotz.

3. Hann Ondóttr kom út í Kolbeins-ár-óse, ok kauper land at5
Sletto-Birne ofan frá Hals-grof enom vestra veg, ok út [535] til
Kolbeins-ár-óss; en enom eystra veg [536] ofan frá loek þeim es verðr
út frá Nauta-bue, ok inn til Gliúfr-ár, ok bió í Við-vík.

4. Sigmundr á Vestfold átte Ingibiaorgo, dóttor Rauðs Ruggo í
Naumo-dale, systor Þórsteins svorfuðar [537]: þeirra son vas
Kolbeinn.10 Hann fór til Íslannz, ok nam land miðle Griót-ár ok
Deilðar-ár, Kolbeins-dal, ok Healta-dal.


10. 1. Healte, son Þórðar Skapls [538], kom til Íslannz, ok nam
Healta-dal at ráðe Kolbeins, ok bió at Hofe: hans syner vóro þeir
Þórvalldr, ok Þórðr [539], ágæter menn.15

2. Þat hefer erfe veret ágætz á Íslande, es þeir erfðo
faoðor sínn. Þeir buðo aollom haofðingjom á Íslande: vóro þar
M.CC. boðs-manna; ok vóro aller vírðinga-menn giaofom út leidder. At
því erfe foerðe Oddr Breiðfirðingr draópo þá es hann hafðe ort um
Healta. Áðr hafðe Glúmr Geira son stemnt Odde um á-nyt [540] til20
[[198: iii. 10.]] Þorska-fiarðar-þings. Þá um váret fóro Healta syner
norðan á skipe til Steingríms-fiarðar, ok gengo norðan um heiðina
þar sem nú es kaolloð Healt-doela-laut. En es þeír gengo á þinget,
vóro þeir svá vel búner, at menn hugðo at Æser være þar komner. Þar
um es betta kveðit:5


    Mange hugðe manna ...


Frá Healta sonom es mikil ætt komen [541].


11. 1. Þórðr hét maðr ágætr. Hann vas son Biarnar Byrðo-smiors, Hroallz
sonar Ryggs, Ásleiks sonar, Biarnar sonar Iárn-síðo, Ragnars sonar
Loðbrókar. Þórðr fór til10 Íslannz ok nam Haofða-straond í Skaga-firðe,
á miðle Una-dals-ár, ok Hrolleifs-dals-ár, ok bió at [542] Haofða.

2. Þórðr átte Friðgerðe, dóttor Þóris Himo [543], ok Friðgerðar,
dóttor Cearfals Ira-konungs. Þau aótto xix baorn.

Biaorn vas son þeirra, es átte Þóriðe, dóttor Refs frá Barðe; ok15
vóro þeirra baorn, Arnórr Kerlingar-nef; ok Þórdís, móðer Orms,
faoðor Þórdísar, móðor Bótolfs.

Þórgeirr hét annarr son Þórðar; hann átte Riúpu, dóttor Arnallz,
Sæmundar sonar; þeirra son vas Halldórr at Hofe [544].

[[199: iii. 10.]]

Snorre vas enn þriðe; hann átte Þórhilde Riúpu, dóttor Þórðar Gelliss;
þeirra son vas Þórðr Hesthaofðe, faðer Karls-efnes, es fann Vínland
[545] et Góða, faðer Snorra.

Þórvalldr Holbarke vas enn fiórðe son Þórðar; hann kom um haust eitt
á Þórvarz-staðe á Síðo til Smiðcels, ok dvalðesk þar um5 hríð: þá fór
hann upp [546] til hellisins Surtz, ok foerðe þar draópo þá, es hann
hafðe ort um Iotunenn í hellenom. Síðan feck hann dóttor Smiðcels;
ok vas þeirra dótter Iórunn, móðer Þórbranz í Skarfa-nese [547].

Bárðr vas enn fimte son Þórðar: hann átte Þóraorno, dóttor10 Þóroddz
Hialms. Þeirra son vas Dagæ [548] Skálld.

Soxolfr vas enn sétte son Þórðar; siaunde Þórgrímr; átte Hróarr;
nionde Cnorr; tionde Þórmóðr Scalle; ellefte Steinn.

Doettr Þórðar vóro þær Þórlaug, es átte Arnbiaorn Sletto-Biarnar son;
þeirra dótter Giaflaug [549], es átte Þórleikr Hoskullz son; þeirra15
son Bolle. Herdís vas aonnor dótter Þórðar; hána átte Atle enn Ramme:
Þórgríma Skeiðar-kinn vas en þriðja: Árnbiorg fiórða: Ásgerðr fimta
[550]: sétta Arnleif: siaunda Þóríðr: átta Friðgerðr í Hvamme.

3. Hrolleifr enn mikle bygðe Hrolleifs-dal, sem ritið es, áðr20 [[200:
iii. 11.]] Þórðr goerðe hann norðan fyr víg Oddz Una sonar. Þá fór
hann í Vatz-dal.

4. Friðleifr hét maðr, Gauzkr at faoðor-ætt; en Bryngerðr hét móðer
hans, ok vas hon Flæmsk [551]. Friðleifr nam Slétta-hlíð alla ok
Friðleifs-dal miðle Friðleifs-dals-ár ok Staf-ár, ok bió í Holte.5
Hans son vas Þióðarr, faðer Ara, ok Bryngerðar, móðor Tungo-Steins.

5. Flóke, son Vilgerðar, Haorða-Kára dóttor, fór til Íslannz ok nam
Flóka-dal miðle Flóka-dals-ár ok Reykjar-hóls. Hann bió at Móe. Flóke
átte Gró, systor Þórðar frá Haofða; þeirra son vas10 Oddleifr [552]
Stafr, es bió á Stafs-hóle, ok deilðe við Healta sono. Dótter Flóka
vas Þióðgerðr, móðer Coðrans, faoðor Þióðgerðar, móðor Coðrans,
faoðor Cárs í Vatz-dale.


12. 1. Þórðr Knappr hét maðr Sygnskr [553], systor-son Biarnar at
Hauge: en annarr hét Nafr-Helgi.  Þeir fóro15 sam-skipa til Íslannz,
ok kómo við Haga-nes. Þórðr nam land upp frá Stíflo til Tungo-ár,
ok bió at [554] Knapp-staoðom. Hann átte Æso, dóttor Liótolfs Goða:
þeirra son vas Hafr, es átte Þóríðe, dóttor Þórkels or Goðdaolom:
þeirra son vas Þórarenn, faðer Ófeigs.

2. Nafar-Helge nam land fyr austan, upp frá Haga-nese til20
Flóka-dals-ár, fyr neðan Barð, ok upp til Tungo-ár, ok bió á [[201:
iii. 11.]] Grindle. Hann átte Gró ena Skygno: þeirra baorn vóro þau
Þórolfr [555] Karl-haofðe; ok annarr Arnórr [556], es barðesk við
Friðleif á Stafs-hóle: ok Þórgerðr, es átte Geirmundr, Sæmundar son;
ok Ulfhildr [557], es átte Arnórr Skefils son í Gaongo-Skarðe: þeirra
son vas Þórgeirr Ofláte, es vá Blót-Már [558] at Móberge. Þórunn
Blá-kinn5 (vas) ein.

3. Bárðr Suðreyingr nam land upp frá Stíflo til Mióva-dals-ár: hans son
vas Hallr Mió-doelingr, faðer Þóríðar, es átte Arnórr Kerlingar-nef.

4. Brúne enn Hvíte hét maðr ágætr [559], son Háreks
Upplendinga-iarls.10 Hann fór til Íslannz af fýse sínne; ok nam land á
miðle Mióva-dals-ár ok Ulfs-dala: hann bió á Brúna-staoðom. Hann átte
Arnóro, dóttor Þórgeirs ens Óða, Liótolfs sonar Goða: þeirra syner vóro
þeir Ketill; ok Ulfheðinn; ok Þórðr, es Barðverjar ero frá komner.15

5. Ulfr víkingr, ok Óláfr Beckr, fóro sam-skipa til Íslannz. Ulfr
nam Ulfs-dala, ok bió þar.

6. Óláfr Beckr vas son Karls or Biark-ey af Háloga-lande: hann vá Þóre
enn Svarta [560], ok varð fyr þat út-lagr. Óláfr nam alla Dala [561]
fyr vestan, ok Óláfs-fiaorð suman til mótz [562] við Þórmóð, (ok)20
bió at Kvia-beck: hans syner vóro þeir Steinolfr [563], faðer Biarnar;
ok Grímolfr; ok Arnoddr, faðer Vilborgar, móðor Karls ens Rauða


[[202: iii. 12.]]

7. Þórmóðr enn Ramme hét maðr Svænskr [564]; hann vá Gyrð, móðor-faoðor
Skialgs [565] á Iaðre, ok varð fyr þat land-flótte fyr Birne konunge
at Hauge. Hann fór til Íslannz, ok kom skipe síno í Siglo-fiaorð,
ok siglðe inn á Þórmoðs-eyre; ok kallaðe af því Siglo-fiaorð,
ok Siglo-nes. Hann nam Siglo-fiaorð allan á miðle5 Ulfs-dala ok
Hvann-dala. Hann bió á Siglo-nese. Hann deilðe um Hvann-dala við
Óláf Beck; ok varð siautián [566] manna bane, áðr þeir sættosk; en
þá skylde sítt sumar hvárr hafa. Þórmóðr vas son Harallz Víkings, es
[567] átte Arngerðe, dóttor Skíða or Skíða-dale: þeirra syner vóro þeir
Arngeirr enn Hvasse, ok Narfe, faðer Þróndar,10 faoðor Hríseyjar-Narva
ok Alrekr, es barðesk í Slétta-hlíð við Cnaorr Þórðar son.

8. Gunnolfr enn Gamle, son Þórbiarnar Þiótz [568] or Sogne: hann vá
Végeir, faoðor Vébiarnar Sygna-kappa, ok fór síðan til Íslannz. Hann
nam Óláfs-fiaorð fyr austan [569] upp til Reykja-ár, ok út til
Vámúla,15 ok bió at Gunnolfs-aó. Hann átte Gró, dóttor Þórvarz frá
Urðom: þeirra syner vóro þeir Steinolfr, ok Þórer [570], ok Þórgrímr.


13. 1. Biorn hét maðr ágætr á Gaut-lande, son Hrólfs frá Ám; hann átte
Hlíf, dóttor Hrólfs, Ingiallz sonar, Fróða sonar konongs.--Starkaðr
enn Gamle vas skáld beggja20 þeirra.--Eyvindr hét son þeirra.

[[204: iii. 12.]]

2. Biorn varð ú-sáttr um iaorð við Sigfast [571], mág Solvars
Gauta-konungs [572]. Sigfastr gaf dóttor sína Solvare: helt iarlenn
[573] (!) Sigfast svá fast, at hann hélt með ofríke aollom iaorðom
Biarnar. Þá selðe Biaorn í haond Hlífo, kono sínne, allt sítt góz,
ok Eyvinde syne sínom á Gaut-lande; en Biaorn bar austan á tolf
hestom silfr.5 Síðan brende hann Sigfast inne með þriá tigo manna
næsto nótt áðr hann foere [574] or lande. Þá fór hann til Noregs:
hann kom vestr á Agðer í Hvine til Gríms hersiss, Kolbiarnar sonar
Sneypis, bróðor Ingiallz ens Tryggva frænda Arinbiarnar í Fiaorðom;
ok tók hann all-vel við hónom. Biaorn ok faoro-nautar hans vóro
um10 vettrenn með Gríme. En es á leið um váret eina nótt, vas þat
at maðr stóð yfer hónom með brugðet sverð, ok vilde leggja á hónom;
hann tók hann haondom, ok hafðe sá fé teket af Gríme til haofoðs
hónom; eige drap hann hann. Grímr vilde svíkja hann til fiár. Því
fór Biaorn braut ok til Ondotz Kraóko, es bió í Hvinis-firðe á Ogðom
[575],15 son Erlings Knýtis. Ondóttr átte Signýjo, Sigvatz dóttor
or Hlíðom or Vík austan. Biaorn fór í vestr-víking á sumrom; en vas
með Ondótte um vetrom. Þá andaðesk Hlíf á Gaut-lande. Biaorn feck þá
Helgo, systor Ondóttz. Þeirra son vas Þróndr Miok-siglande. Síðan kom
Eyvindr austan til faoðor síns Biarnar, hann20 [[206: iii. 12.]] vas
son Hlífar. Hann tók við her-skipom faoðor síns, ok þeirre iðn,
es hann hafðe haft, þá es hónom leiddesk hernoðr.

Eyvindr feck síðan á Írlande Raforto, dóttor Cearvals konungs. Hon ól
svein í Suðreyjom, ok selðe þar til fóstrs. Tveimr [576] vetrom síðarr
kómo þau aftr til eyjanna at vitja sveinsins; ok saó þar svein5 cygðan
vel, ok ecki hold á; þvi at hann vas svelltr. Þau kaolloðo sveinenn af
því Helga enn magra. Hann vas síðan fóstraðr á Írlande. Eyvindr vas því
kallaðr Austmaðr, at hann kom austan af Svia-ríke vestr um haf [577].

3. Biaorn andaðesk at Ondotz mágs síns; en Grímr talðe konung10 eiga
at taka allan arf hans, fyrer þvi at hann vas útlendr, en Þróndr
sonar son [578] hans fyr vestan haf. Ondóttr hélt féno til handa
Þrónde systor-syne [579] sínom.

Helge foeddesk upp á Írlande: hann feck Þórunnar Hyrno, dóttor
Ketils Flatnefs or Suðreyjom, ok Yngvildar dóttor Ketils15 Veðrs af
Hrínga-ríke; ok aótto þau maorg baorn [580].


14. 1. Síðan fór Helge til Íslannz með kono sína, ok baorn, Hrólf, ok
Ingialld, ok Ingunne, es átte Hámundr Heljar-skinn.--Hann fylgðe enn
út Helga. En es Helgi sá land [581], geck hann til frétta við Þór hvar
hann skylde land taka: en frétten20 vísaðe hónom til Eyja-fiarðar, ok
lofaðe hónom hvárke at halda [[207: iii. 12.]] austr né vestr þaðan. Þá
spurðe Hrólfr son hans, áðr firðenom lauk upp, ef Þórr vísaðe hónom
í Dums-haf [582] til vetr-vistar, hvárt hann munde þat hafa eðr eige;
þvi at skipverjom þótte mál or hafe es á liðet vas miok sumaret [583].

2. Helge tók land fyr útan Hrísey, ok fyr innan Svarfaðar-dal.5 Hann
vas enn fyrsta vettr á Hámundar-staoðom. Þeir fengo vetr mikinn,
svá at við sialft vas, at kvik-fé þeirra moende deyja, þat es þeir
haofðo. En um váret geck Helge upp á Sólar-fiall [584], ok sá,
at svartara vas inn at siá myklo til fiarðarens,--es þeir kaolloðo
Eyja-fiaorð, af eyjom þeim es þar laógo úte fyrer [585]--Bar hann þá
[586] á skip10 allt es hann átte; en Hámundr bió efter [587]. Hann
lende við Galtar-hamar. Þar skaut hann svínom tveimr á land, gelte
þeim es Solve hét, ok gylto. Þau fundosk þremr [588] vetrom síðarr
í Solva-dale, ok vóro þá saman lxx svína. Þann vettr bió Helge at
Bíldz-aó; en um sumaret kannaðe hann hérað allt; ok nam Eyja-fiaorð
allan15 miðle Siglo-ness ok Reynis-ness; ok goerðe elld mikinn við
hvern vaz-ós við sió, ok helgaðe ser svá allan fiaorðenn nesja miðle.

3. Einom vettre síðarr foerðe Helge bú sítt í Crist-nes, ok bió þar
til dauða-dags [589].  Hann vas miok blandenn í trúnne: hann trúðe á
Crist ok kende því við hann bústað sínn [590]; en þó hét hann20 á Þór
til sæfara ok harðræða, ok allz þess er hónom þótte mesto [[222, 207:
iii. 13,16.]] varða. Í bú-foerslo Helga varð Þórunn Hyrna léttare
í Þórunnar-ey í Eyja-fiarðar-ár-kvíslom, ok vas þá foedd Þórbiaorg
Holma-sól.

Síðan skifte Helge lande með sonom sínom ok maógom.

4. Ingiallde syne sínom gaf hann upp frá Þver-aó enne ýtre, fyr austan
Eyia-fiarðar-aó til Arnar-hváls, hann bió á Þver-aó enne5 OEfre;
ok reiste þar hof mikit. Hann átte Salgerðe, dóttor Steinólfs ens
Lága or Hrísey, Olvéss sonar Barna-karls: þeirra son vas Eyjolfr,
es átte Ástríðe Vígfúss dóttor af Vors, Víkinga-Kára (sonar): syner
(þeirra) Vígfúss, ok Víga-Glúmr, ok Þórsteinn. Son Glúms vas Vígfúss,
faðer Bergs, faoðor Steinunnar, móðor10 Þórsteins Rangláz.

[S: Hann átte Salgerðe Steinólfs dóttor; þeirra son Eyjolfr, faðer
Víga-Glúms; ok Steinolfr, faðer Þórarens Ílla; ok Arnórs ens Góða
Rauðæings.]

Efter þat tóko menn at byggja í land-náme Helga at hans ráðe.15

5. Maðr hét Þórsteinn Svarfaðr, son Rauðs Ruggo í Naumo-dale
[591]. Hann átte Hilde, dóttor Þráins Svarta-þurs. Þórsteinn fór til
Íslannz, ok nam Svarfaðar-dal at ráðe Helga. Baorn hans vóro þau,
Karl enn Rauða, es bió at Karls-aó [592]; ok Goðrún, es átte Hafþórr
víkingr: þeirra baorn vóro þau Klaufe ok Groa, es átte Gríss20 Gledill.

[[208: iii. 13.]]

6. Atle Illíngr hét maðr; hann drap Hafþór, en sette Karl enn
Rauða í iarn. Þá kom Klaufe á úvart, ok drap Atla, en tók Karl or
iarne. Klaufe átte Yngvilde Rauð-kinn, dóttor Ásgeirs Rauðfelldar,
systor þeirra Óláfs Volo-briótz ok Þórleifs Skáldz. Fyrer þeim hió
hann iamna-belg es þeir tóko í lande hans. Þá kvað5 Þórleifr þetta:


    Belg hió fyr mer Boeggver iamna [593]
    En fyr Oláfe ál ok verjo:
    Svá skal verða, 'ef ver lifom,'
    Við ... [594] Boggver hoeggvenn.10


Þar af goerezk Svarfdoela Saga.

7. Karl hét maðr, es nam Straond alla út frá Ufsom til Mígande.

8. Hámundr Heljar-skinn eignaðesk Galmans-straond [595] alla ok á
miðle Svarfaðar-dals ok Hoerg-ár-dals, ok bió þar sem Helge hafðe
fyrst buet, ok nú heiter síðan á Hámundar-staoðom.15

9. Hámundr gaf Erne frænda sínom, es numet hafðe Arnar-fiaorð fyrr,
(laond [596]) þau es vóro fyr útan Reistar-aó. Orn bió í Arnar-nese;
en Hámundr selðe Þórvalde þær iarðer allar es liggja á miðle Reistar-ár
ok Horgárdals-ár.--Við hann es Þórvallz-dalr kendr; þar bió hann.20

10. Helge enn Magre gaf þá Hámunde iarðer á miðle Merki-gils [[210:
iii. 13.]] ok Skiálgs-dals-ár; ok bió hann á Espi-hóle. Þórer vas
son hans es þar bió, faðer Þórvallz Króks [597], faoðor Cetils,
faoðor Einars, faoðor Þórsteins Ranglatz.

Þórunn hét dótter Arnar or Arnar-nese, es átte Ásgeirr Rauð­felldr,
son Heriolfs, þess es nam Breið-dal. Ásgeirr vas bróðer5 Bodmods
Gerpis, Grímolfs sonar af Ogðom. Móðer þeirra Ásgeirs vas Hialmgerðr,
syster þeirra Broz ok Boga. Narfe hét son Arnar or Arnar-nese; hann
átte Ulfeiðe Ingiallz-dóttor, Helga sonar ens Magra.--Við hann ero
Narfa-sker kend.--Þeirra son Ásbrandr, faðer Hello-Narfa.10

11. [S: Hámundr Heljar-skinn, son Hiors konungs, miðlaðe laond
við Orn frænda sínn, þá es hann kom vestan--þann es numit hafðe
Arnar-fiaorð--ok bió hann í Arnar-nese: hans dótter vas Iðunn, es
átte Ásgeirr Rauðfelldr. Son Arnar vas Narfe es Narba-sker15 ero við
kend. Hann átte Ulfeiðe, dóttor Ingiallz or Gnúpo-felle. Þeirra syner
vóro þeir Ásbrandr, faðer Hello-Narba; ok Eyjolfr, faðer Þórkels í
Haga; ok Helge, faðer Gríms á Kalf-skinne.]

12. Galman [598] hét maðr, es nam Galmans straond, á miðle
Þórvallz-dals-ár20 ok Reistar-ár: hans son vas Ormr, faðer Þórvallz,
faoðor Biarnar, faoðor Þóroz, faoðor Þórunnar, móðor Dýrfinno, [[211:
iii. 14.]] móðor Þórsteins Smiðs, Skeggja sonar. [S: Hans son vas
Þórvaldr, f. Orms, f. Barna-Þóroddz, etc.]

13. Þórvallde gaf Helge land miðle Reistar-ár ok Horg-ár; en hann
hafðe áðr buet í Þórvallz-dale.

14. Geirleifr hét maðr, es nam Horgár-dal upp til Myrk-ár;5 hann vas
Hrapps son, ok bió í Haga-enom [599] Forna: hans son vas Biaorn enn
Auðge, es Auðbrecko-menn ero frá komner.

15. Maðr hét Þórðr Slítande: hann nam Horgár-dal upp frá Myrk-aó, ok
ofan til Dranga aoðrom megin. Hans son vas Ornolfr, es átte Yngvilde
Allra-systor. Þeirra syner vóro þeir Þórðr, ok10 Þórvarðr í Crist-nese;
ok Steingrímr at Kroppe.

16. Þórðr Slítande gaf Þórgeire Skolm, frænda sínom, af land-náme
síno. Hans son vas Þóralfr [600] enn Sterke, es bió at Myrk-aó.

17. Þórer Þursa-sprenger hét maðr; hann vas foeddr í Omð á
Háloga-lande. Hann varð land-floemðr fyr Hákone iarle Griótgarz15
syne, ok fór hann af því til Íslannz. Hann nam OExna-dal allan, ok
bió at Vaz-aó. Hans son vas Steinroeðr enn Ramme, es maorgom manne
vann bót þeim es illar vætter [601] goerðo mein.

18. Geirhildr hét fiaolkunnig kona ok mein-saom [602].  Þat saó
ofresker menn, at Steinroeðr kom at henne úvarre; en hon brá ser20
[[212: iii. 14.]] í nautz-belgs líke vatz-fullz. Steinroeðr vas
iarn-smiðr, ok hafðe iarn-gadd í hende. Um fund þeirra es þetta kveðit:


    Fork lét æ sem orkar ...


Dótter Steinroeðar vas Þórliót, es átte Þórvarðr í Crist-nese.

19. Auðolfr hét maðr; hann fór af Iaðre til Íslannz, ok nam5
Hoergár-dal, niðr frá Þver-aó til Bægis-ár [603], ok bió at enne syðre
Bægis-aó. Hann átte Þórillde, dóttor Helga (ens) Magra. Þeirra dótter
Yngvilldr, es átte Þóroddr Hialmr, faðer Arnliótz, faoðor Halldórs,
faoðor Einars, faoðor Iorunnar, móðor Hallz [f. Gizurar, f. Þorvallz,
f. Gizurar iarls] [604].10

20. Eysteinn Radulfs son [605], OExna-Þóris sonar, nam land niðr frá
Bægis-aó til Kræklinga-hlíðar [606]; ok bió at Lóne: hans son vas
Gunnsteinn, es átte Hlíf, dóttor Heðins or Miolo. Þeirra baorn vóro
þau Halldóra, es Víga-Glúmr átte; ok Þórgrímr; ok Grímr Eyrar-leggr.15

21. Eyvindr Hane hét gaofogr maðr; hann kom út síð land-náma-tíðar
[607]. Hann átte skip við Þórgrím Hlífar son. Hann vas frænde
Ondotz sona. Þeir gaófo hónom land; ok bió hann í Hana-túne; ok
vas hann kallaðr Tún-Hane--þar es nú kallað Mar-boele.--Hann [[213:
iii. 15.]] átte Þórunne, dóttor Þórolfs OExna-Þóris sonar: hans son
vas Snorre Hlíðmanna-Goðe.


15. 1. Ondóttr Kráka, sá es fyrr vas geteð, goerðesk ríkr maðr. En
es Biaorn [608] mágr hans andaðesk, talðe Grímr herser konung eiga
at taka allt fé hans; þvi at hann vas5 útlendr; en syner hans fyr
vestan haf, Eyvindr Austmaðr, ok Þróndr Miok-siglande. En Ondóttr
gat halldet féino til handa Þrónde systor-syne sínom. En es Þróndr
frá andlát faoðor síns, siglðe hann er Suðr-eyjom þá sigleng, es
hann vas Miok-siglande af kallaðr, ok tók þá við faoðor-erfð sínne;
ok fór til Íslannz, sem10 síðarr mun sagt verða.

2. Boer Ondóttz stóð ner sió, ok skamt á meðal ok Ingiallz
boejar. Grímr bió skamt frá Ingiallde; hann fór at Ondótte um nótt, es
hann viðaðe í skóge til aol-hito lítlo fyre Iól, ok vá hann í trauste
konongs, ok þá fióra saman. Ena saomo nótt bar Signý15 á lang-skip
allt lausa-fé Ondótz; ok fór með sono sína tvá, þá Ásmund ok Ásgrím,
ok alla húskarla sína, til Sigvatz faoðor síns; en sende sono sína
til Heðins fóstra síns í Sókna-dal til fylsknis; þvi at hon vette, at
Grímr moende efter þeim leita. En hann kom efter þeim með tvau skip
fyr austan Líðandes-nes, ok rann-sakaðe20 skip hennar, ok fann eige
sveinana. Steinarr hét maðr, es sveinom fylgðe til Heðins: þangat fór
Grímr at leita þeirra. Þeir fundo [[215: iii. 15.]] Ornolf son Heðins
í skóge; hann goerðe ser órar, ok lét sem hann felle í brotfall; þvi
at hann vilde ecki segja. Þá fundo þeir annan son Heðins es Ulfr hét,
es geymðe feár faoðor síns; hann tók halft hundrað silfrs af Gríme at
segja til sveinanna: hann foerðe faoðor 5 sínom féit, ok sagðe þetta;
en kom ecki til Gríms. Eige treystesk Grímr heim at soekja Héðin;
þvi at hann grunaðe trúleik sveinsins: ok fór hann heim; en sveinar
vóro í iarð-húse til þess es haust kom. Þá leyndosk þeir í braut,
ok vildo til Sigvatz móðor-faoðor síns, ok urðo viller, á hvára haond
þeim siór skylde 10 liggja; frost vas mikit á; en þeir skólauser. At
boe kómo þeir þá. Ásmundr mælte, 'Kenner þú boe þenna, bróðer.' 'Eige,'
sagðe Ásgrímr. Ok es þeir kómo at, kendo þeir svefn-skemmo þá, es faðer
þeirra hafðe goera látið. Þeir þóttosk þá illa komner; ok snoero til
Ingializ ens Tryggva. Þá vas Ióla aftan. Þeir dulðosk 15 þar. Gyða
kende þá fyrst, ok minte Ingialld á vin-giæðe þeirra Ondottz, ok bað
þeim við-taoko. Þar vóro þeir þann vetr; ok haofðo eige naofn sín.

En um sumaret efter goerðe Grímr veizlo mót Auðunne, iarle Harallz
konungs. En þá nótt es hann hafðe veret at aol-hito [609], þá 20 brendo
syner Ondottz hann inne. Síðan tóko þeir bát Ingiallz ok roero braut
til eyjar es liggr á Hvine. Þeir saogðo áðr Gyðo ok Ingiallde hvat
í vas orðet. Hann bað þá verða í brauto, ok [[216: iii. 15.]] koma
alldrí í augsýn ser. Síðan roero þeir til eyarinnar. [610] Þeir setto
upp bát sínn, ok gengo til húss. Þeir heyrðo manna tal í húsonom [611]
um nóttena, at þar haófðo veret í ferð með Auðunne iarle. Þeir gengo
til bátzens, es þeir haofðo þetta heyrt, ok roero til lannz. Þeir saó
hvar flaut sneckja iarlsens tiaolldoð. Þeir gengo til þess5 herbyrgis
es þeim vas sagt at iarlenn svaf í; en hans menn vóro á skipe; en
tveir menn héldo vaorð yfer iarlenom. Ásmundr greip þá báða, ok hélt
þeim. Ásgrímr geck at iarlenom, ok sette spiótz-odd sínn fyr brióst
iarlenom; ok bað hann reiða ser faoðor-giaold. Þá selðe iarl fram
goll-hringa þriá, ok goðvefjar skickjo; en Ásgrímr10 gaf hónom namn,
ok kallaðe hann Auðun Geit. Ondótz syner hliópo til bátzens ok roero út
efter firðenom; ok í raost es vas á firðenom, ok breiddo þar á sióenn
skickjona, fyrir (því) at þeir saó at iarls-menn roero efter þeim,
ok mondo þeir eige undan komask. Þeir iarls-menn fundo skickjona,
ok hugðo þá mundo15 vesa drucknaða.

En Ondoz syner fóro í Súrna-dal, norðr um Stim, til Eiriks Olfus
lennz mannz; þar bió Hallsteinn Hestr annarr lendr maðr. Þeir
aótto Ióla-dryckjo, ok veitte Eirikr vel fýrre; en Hallsteinn laust
Eirik með horne þá es þeir vóro at hans. En (es) Eirikr vas20 heim
farenn, en Hallsteinn sat efter, þá kom Ásgrímr einn inn, ok [[217:
iii. 15.]] veitte Hallsteine mikit sár; ok hlióp út síðan ok til
skógar; en þeir efter hónom. Ásgrímr lagðesk á sund á aó í froste;
en húskarlar Hallsteins særðo hann miok með skotom. Hann komsk til
kerlingar einnar í skóge; hon skar kalf sínn, ok lagðe garnar kalfsens
hiá Ásgríme. Svá þótte þeim es inn kómo sem hans iðr5 læge þar, en hann
være dauðr. Þeir fóro heim, en kerling groedde hann á laun í iarð-húse.

3. Þat sumar fór Ásmundr til Íslannz, ok hugðe Ásgrím bróðor sínn
dauðan. Þá gaf Helge enn Magre hónom land at nema í Kræklinga-hlíð.10

Þá fór út með hónom Baoðolfr or Hvine; hans son vas Skegge, ok Þórer
Keilis-múle. Síðarr átte Baoðolfr Þórbiaorgo Holma-sól; þeirra dótter
vas Þórgerðr es Ásmundr átte Ondótz son.

4. Hallsteinn dó et sama vár or saórom. Þá gaf Eirikr Olfus Ásgríme
lang-skip þrí-toegt [612] at rúma-tale, ok héllt hann því í hernað;15
ok hafðe þá iðn nockor sumor. Haralldr konongr sette Þórgeir,
systor-son Gríms, til haofuðs Ásgríme, ok feck hónom her-skip tvau:
hann fann hann alldrí. Þá fór hann til Íslannz, ok ætlaðe at drepa
Ásmund; ok kom á Eyrar, ok vas í Hvinverja-dale um vettrenn. Þat
sumar efter kom Ásgrímr út á Eyrom, ok átte skip20 halft við Þóre
Keilis-múla, ok vóro fiórer menn ok tottogo á. Þeir vóro ósamþycker,
ok leyste Ásgrímr skip til sín. Þórer reið norðr [[218: iii. 15.]] með
halfa skipverja, ok kom í Hvinverja-dal, ok sagðe til fara Ásgríms,
ok reið heim síðan. Ásgrímr reið haolfom mánaðe síðarr frá skipe;
ok giste at Þróndar Miok-siglanda, í Þróndar-holt; hann bauð hónom
vetr-vist, ok kvað hónom eige mundo óhoett vesa norðr at ríða fyr
Þórgeire. Ásgrímr fór þó norðr með tolfta mann,5 ok haofðo tolf
hesta klyfjaða ok toskor á. Þann dag es þeir riðo um Kiaol, bað
hann þá í brynjom ríða, ok hafa cofla yfer útan; ok segja, ef þeir
Þórgeirr fyndesk, at Þórer Keilis-múle foere þar, en Ásgrímr være norðr
farenn. Þeir vóro þar tvær nætr at Þórgeirs; þvi at hann hugðe þá Þóre
vesa. Hann hafðe fyrer þriá tego [613]10 manna. Hann reið á gaoto með
þeim, ok sofnaðe es hann kom heim, ok dreymðe, at kona koeme at hónom,
ok segðe hónom, hverer gester með hónom haofðo veret. Síðan riðo þeir
efter Ásgríme. Þeir Ásgrímr [614] biðo á Vekels-hauge enom syðra,
ok þar kom Ásmundr bróðer hans til móz við hann með fióra tigo [615]
manna;15 hann sætte þá Þórgeirr.

5. Faóm vetrom síðarr fór Ásgrímr útan, ok feck Geirríðar [616], Eiriks
dóttor Olfuss. Þeirra son vas Elliða-Grímr. Þau fóro síðan til Íslannz,
ok gaf Helge enn Magre Ásgríme land-nám í Kræklinga-hlíð; ok aótto
þeir broeðr alla hlíðena--ok vas af því kaolloð20 Kræklinga-hlíð, at
þeir vóro syner Ondotz Kraóko.--Ásmundr bió at Gler-aó enne syðre;
en Ásgrímr at enne noerðre. Son Ásgríms [[219: iii. 16.]] vas
Elliða-Grímr, faoðor Ásgríms, faoðor Sigfúss, faoðor Þórgerðar,
móðor Gríms, faoðor Svertings.

6.  [617]Helge enn Magre gaf Hámunde máge sínom iaorð á miðle
Merki-gils ok Skiálgs-dals-ár; ok bió (hann) á Espi-hóle enom
syðra. Hans son vas Þórer es þar bió; hann átte Þórdíse Caðals-dóttor:5
þeirra son Þórarenn á Espi-hóle enom noerðra; ok Þór-vallðr Krókr
á Grund;--en Þórgrímr í Maoðro-felle vas eige hennar son [618],--ok
Vígdís dótter [619].

7. Helge gaf Þóro dóttor sína Gunnare syne Ulfliótz, es laog hafðe
út; ok land upp [620] frá Skiálgs-dals-aó til Hals. Hann bió í10
Diúpa-dale: þeirra baorn vóro þau Þórsteinn, Ketill [621] ok Steinolfr
[622], ok Yngvilldr, ok Þórlaug [623].

8. Helgi gaf Auðunne Rotin [624], syni Þórolfs Smiors, Þórsteins sonar
Skrofa, Gríms sonar Cambans, Helgo dóttor sína, ok land upp frá Halse
til Villinga-dals. Hann bió í Saurboe, þeirra baorn15 (vóro þau)
Einarr, faðer Eyjolfs, faoðor Goðmundar ens Ríkja; ok Vígdís, móðer
Halla ens Hvíta, faoðor Orms, faoðor Gellis, faoðor Orms, faoðor Halla
[f. Þorgeirs, f. Þorvarz, f. Ara, f. Guðmundar byscops].

9. Hámundr Heljar-skinn feck Helgo Helga-dóttor efter andlát20
Ingunnar systor hennar; ok vas þeirra dótter Yngvildr Allra-syster,
es Ornolfr átte.

[[221, 223: iii. 17.]]

10. Helge gaf Hrólfe syne sínom aoll laond fyr austan Eyja-fiarðar-aó
frá Hvále [625] upp, ok bió hann í Gnúpo-felle, ok reiste þar hof
miket. Hann átte Þórorno, dóttor Þróndar Mióbeins: þeirra baorn
vóro þau Hafliðe enn Orve, ok Valþiófr, Viðarr, ok Grane, Baoðvarr,
ok Ingialldr, Eyvindr; Goðlaug es Þórkell enn Svarte5 átte. Valþiófr
vas faðer Helga, faoðor Þóris, faoðor Arnórs, faoðor Þóríðar.

11. Helge gaf Hlíf, dóttor sína, Þórgeire syne Þórðar Bialca; ok land
út frá Þver-aó til Varð-giár. Þau bioggo at Fiske-loek. Baorn þeirra
vóro þau Þórðr ok Helga.10

12. Skage Skofta son hét maðr ágætr á Moere; hann varð úsáttr
við Eystein Glumro, ok fór af því til Íslannz. Hann nam at ráðe
Helga Eyja-fiarðar-straond ena noerðre [626] út frá Varð-giaó til
Fnióska-dals-ár [627], ok bió í Siglo-vík. Hans son vas Þórbiaorn,
faðer Heðins ens Milda, es Svalbarð lét goera sextán vettrom fyrer15
Cristne; hann átte Ragneiðe, dóttor Eyjolfs Valgerðar sonar.


16. 1. Þórer Snepill hét maðr, son Ketils Brimils, Ornolfs sonar,
Biaornolfs sonar, Gríms sonar Loðin-kinna. Ketill Brimill átte
Iórunne, dóttor Þórgnýs [628] Laogmannz af Svia-ríke. Ketill Brimill
vas víkingr mikill. Hann fór til Hialt-lannz með20 Torf-Einare. En es
hann biósk til Íslannz, hét Gautr skipvere [[223: iii. 17.]] hans. En
es þeir laógo til hafs, kómo at þeim víkingar, ok vildo ræna
þá; en Gautr laust skipverja [629] þeirra með hialmon-vele til
bana. Við þat laogðo víki(ngar frá) [630]. Síðan vas hann kallaðr
Hialmon-Gautr. Þeir Þórer fóro til Íslannz, ok kómo skipe síno í [631]
Skiálfanda-fliótz-ós. Þórer nam Kallda-kinn, miðle Skugga-biarga5
ok Liósa-vaz-skarz. Hann nam þar eige ynðe, ok fór á braut. Þá kvað
hann þetta:--


    Her liggr kióla keyrer Kalda kinn um aldr:
    En ver forom heiler Hialmun-Gautr á braut.


Síðan nam hann Hnióska-dal [632] allan til Ódeilo, ok bió at
Lunde.10 Hann blótaðe lundenn. Ormr Tosco-bak vas son Snepils,
faoðor Hlenna ens Gamla; ok Þórkell Svarte í Hleiðrar-garðe: hann
átte Goðlaugo Hrólfs dóttor: þeirra son Ongull enn Svarte; ok Rafn,
faðer Þórðar at Stocka-hlaoðum [633], ok Goðríðr es átte Þorgeirr
Goðe at Liósa-vatne.15

2. Þengill Miok-siglande fór af Háloga-lande til Íslannz. Hann nam land
at ráðe Helga út frá Hniósk-aó til Grene-víkr; ok bió at Haofða. Hans
syner vóro þeir Vermundr, faðer Ásolfs í Haofða; ok Hallsteinn, es
þetta kvað, es hann siglðe af hafe, es hann frá andlát faoðor síns:20

[[225: iii. 18.]]


    Drúper Haofðe, dauðr es Þengill:
    Hlæja hlíðer við Hallsteine.


3. Þórmóðr hét maðr, es nam Grene-vík, ok Hval-látr, ok Straond alla
út til Þórgeirs-fiarðar. Hans son vas Snortr [634], es Snertlingar
ero frá komner.5

4. Þórgeirr hét maðr, es nam Þórgeirs-fiaorð, ok Hvalvaz-fiaorð.

5. Loðinn Ongull hét maðr; hann vas foeddr í Ongle [635] á
Háloga-lande. Hann fór fyre ofríke Hákonar iarls Griótgarz sonar til
Íslannz.--Í Ongle hafðe buet Sigarr konungr á Steig, ok þar [636]
es Signýjar-bruðr ok Hagbarz-holmr.--Loðinn Ongull dó í hafe;10 en
Eyvindr son hans [637] nam Flateyjar-dal upp til Gunnsteina ok blótaðe
þá. Þar liggr Ódeila á miðle land-náms þeirra Þóris Snepils. Ásbiaorn
Detti-áss [638] vas son Eyvindar, faðer Finnboga ens Ramma.


17. 1. Bárðr, sonr Heyjangs-Biarnar, kom skipe síno í Skiálfanda
fliótz-ós, ok nam Bárðar-dal allan upp15 frá Kalfborgar-aó [639],
ok Eyja-dals-aó, ok bió at Lundar-brecko um hríð. Þá markaðe hann,
at betre vóro land-viðre an haf-viðre; ok hann ætlaðe af því [640]
betre lannz kost fyr sunnan heiðar [641]. Hann sende sono sína suðr
um Goe [642]. Þá fundo þeir Goe-beytla, ok annan gróðr. En annat
vár efter goerðe Bárðr kialka hverjo20 [[226: iii. 18.]] kykvende
[643] því es gegnt vas, ok lét draga sítt fóðr ok feár-hlut. Hann
fór Bárðar-gaoto um Vánar-skarð; ok nam síðan Fliótz-hverfe; ok bió
at Gnúpom. Hann vas kallaðr Gnúpa-Bárðr.

2. Hans son vas Sigmundr, faðer Þórsteins, es átte Æso, dóttor Hrólfs
Rauð-skeggs: þeirra dótter Þórunn, es átte Þórkell Leifr,5 ok vas
þeirra son Þórgeirr Goðe [644] at Liósa-vatne.

Annarr son Bárðar vas Þórsteinn, faðer Þóriss es vas á Fitjom með
Hákone konunge, ok skar rauf á oxa-húð, ok hafðe þá hlíf--því vas hann
kallaðr Leðr-hals.--Hann átte Fiorleifo [645], Eyvindar dóttor: þeirra
syner vóro þeir Hávarðr í Fellz-múla; ok Heriolfr10 at Mý-vatne;
ok Ketill í Húsa-vík; ok Vemundr Kogor [646], es átte Halldóro,
dóttor Þórkels Svarta; ok Áskell; ok Hals, es bió at Helga-staoðom.

3.  [647]Campa-Grímr fór or Suðreyjom til Íslannz; ok velkte þá úte
allt sumar; ok braut skip sítt við Skialfanda-fliótz-ós. Hann nam15
Kalda-kinn í annat sinn, ok selde ymsom maonnom síðan: hans dótter
vas Arnbiaorg, es Ásolfr í Haofða átte.

4. Þórfiðr Máne, son Áskels Tiorfa [648]; hann nam land fyr neðan
Eyjadals-aó til Landa-mótz, ok um [649] Liósa-vatz-skarð; ok bió
at OExar-aó.20

[[227: iii. 19.]]


18. 1. Þórer, son Gríms Gráfeldar-múla af Roga-lande, hann nam
Liósa-vaz-skarð [650]. Hans son vas Þórkell Leifr enn Háve, faðer
Þórgeirs Goða. Þórgeirr átte fyrr [651] Goðríðe, dóttor Þórkels
Svarta. Þeirra syner vóro [652]; Þórkell Hákr, ok Haos-coldr, Tiorve
ok Collgrímr, Þórsteinn, ok Þórvarðr; en dótter [653]5 Sigríðr. Síðan
átte hann Salgerðe [654], dóttor Arngeirs ens Austroena. Hann átte
ok Þórkaotlo, Dala-Collz dóttor. Syner hans ok þeirra kvenna vóro,
Þórgrímr, Óttarr, Þórgils. Þesser vóro laun-getner, Þórgrímr, ok
Finne enn Draum-spake; hans móðer hét Lækny [655] út-lend.10

2. Heðinn ok Hosculldr, syner Þórsteins Þurs fóro til Íslannz,
ok [656] naómo land fyr ofan [657] Tungo-heiðe. Heðinn bió at
Heðins-haofða [658], ok átte Goðrúno. Þeirra dótter Arnríðr, es
Ketill Fior-leifar son átte; en Goðrún vas dótter þeirra es Hrólfr
átte í Gnúpo-felle. Hosculldr nam laond aoll fyr austan Lax-aó, ok
bió15 í Skaorðo-vík [659]--við hann es kennt Hoscullz-vatn, þvi at
hann drucknaðe þar. Í þeirra land-náme es Húsa-vík, es Garðarr átte
vetr-seto. Son Hoscullz vas Hróalldr, es átte Ægileifo, dóttor Hrólfs,
Helga sonar ens Magra.

3. Vestmarr ok Ulfr fóstbroeðr fóro á [660] eino skipe til Íslannz,
ok20 naómo Reykjar-dal [661] allan fyr vestan Lax-aó, upp til
Vestmars-vatz [662]. [[228: iii. 19.]] Vestmarr átte Goðlaugo. Ulfr
bió under Skratta-felle [663]; hans son vas Geirolfr, es átte Vígdíse,
Conals dóttor, síðarr an Þórgrímr: þeirra son vas Hallr.


19. 1. Þórsteinn Hofðe hét maðr; hann vas herser á Haorða-lande:
hans syner vóro þeir Eyvindr ok5 Ketill Haorzke. Eyvindr fýstesk
til Íslannz, efter andlát faoðor síns: en Ketill bað hann nema
baóðom þeim land ef honom sýndesk síðarr at fara. Ketill kom í
Húsa-vík skipe síno [664] ok nam Reykja-dal upp frá Vestmars-vatne,
ok bió á Helga-staoðom--ok es þar haugr hans. Hans son vas Áskell,
es bana-sár feck við Eyja-fiarðar-aó10 gegnt Kroppe, þá es Steingrímr
vilde hefna sauðar-haofuðs-hoeggs. Áskell átte dóttor Grenjaðar: þeirra
son Víga-Scúta. Fiorleif hét dótter Eyvindar es Þórer Leðr-hals átte.

2. Náttfare, es með Garðare hafðe út faret, eignaðe ser áðr Reykja-dal;
ok hafðe merkt á viðom; en Eyvindr rak hann braut;15 ok lét hann hafa
Náttfara-vík [665].

3. Ketill, bróðer hans, bió á Einars-staoðom: hans son vas Conall,
es átte Oddnýjo, Einars dóttor, systor Eyjolfs, Valgerðar sonar:
þeirra son Einarr. Þórðr vas annarr son Conals; hann vas faðer Socka
á Breiða-mýre, faoðor Conals.20

4. [S: Ketill fór út at orð-sendingo Eyvindar; hann bió á
Einars-staoðom: [[230: iii. 19.]] hans son vas Conall, (ok) Þórsteinn,
faðer Einars, es þar bió síðan. Sonr Eyvindar vas Áskell Goðe, es
átte dóttor Gren-gaðar: þeirra syner Þórsteinn ok Víga-Scúta. Dótter
Eyvindar vas Fiorleif. Conall átte Oddnýjo, Einars dóttor, systor
Eyjolfs Valgerðar sonar: þeirra baorn vóro þau Einarr, es átte sex
sono,5 ok dóttor Þóreyjo, es átte Steinolfr Márs son; ok aonnor
Eydís, es Þórsteinn Goðe átte or Ásbiarnar-vík. Þórðr Conals son vas
faðer Socka á Breiða-mýre, faoðor Conals. Dótter Conals vas Vígdís,
es átte Þórgrímr, son Þórbiarnar Skaga; ok vas þeirra son Þórleifr
Geirolfs-stiúpr.]10

5. Grenjaðr hét maðr, Hrapps son, bróðer Geirleifs: hann nam
Þegjanda-dal, ok Krauna-heiðe [666], Þórgerðar-fell, ok Lax-ár-dal
neðan; hann bió á Grenjaðar-staoðom. Hann átte Þórgerðe, dóttor Helga
Hestz: þeirra son vas Þórgils Vá-múle, faðer Onundar [f. Hallbero,
m. Þórgerðar, m. Hallz ábóta, ok Hallbero es Reinn15 Styrmis son átte].


20. 1. Boðolfr [667] hét maðr, son Gríms Grimolfs sonar af Ogðom,
bróðer Baoðmóðs.  Hann átte Þórunne, dóttor Þióðolfs [668] ens Fróða:
þeirra son vas Skegge. Þau fóro til Íslannz ok bruto skip sítt við
Tiornes, ok vóro at Bodolfs-kytjo [669]20 enn fyrsta vetr. Hann nam
Tiornes allt á miðle Tungo-ár ok [[231: iii. 20.]] Óss. Baoðolfr
feck síðan Þórbiaorgo Holma-sól, dóttor Helga. (Þeirra) dótter vas
Þórgerðr, es átte Ásmundr Ondotz son: þeirra son Þórleifr, faðer
Þóríðar, es átte Valla-Liótr.

2. Skegge Baoðolfs son nam Keldu-hverfe upp til Keldo-ness, ok bió í
Mikla-garðe: hann átte Helgo, dóttor Þórgeirs at Fiski-loek:5 þeirra
son vas Þórer, farmaðr mikill; hann lét goera knaorr í Sogne--þann
vígðe Sigorðr byscop enn Ríke, es vas með Óláfe kononge Tryggva syne;
en skírðe Þóre--af þeim knerre ero brandar fyr durom lenge síðan í
Mikla-garðe, veðr-spáer miok [allt fram um daga Branz byscop]. Ormr
vas son Þóris; hann myrðe Gretter10 Ásmundar son.--Um Þóre orte
Gretter þetta:


    Ríðkat ek ræki-meiðom ...
    Hnecki ek frá þar es flockar ...


Án hét son Þóris, faðer Arnar, [f. Ingibiargar m. Scums, f. Þórkels
ábóta].15

3. Máne hét maðr; hann vas foeddr í Omð á Háloga-lande. Hann fór til
Íslannz, ok braut við Tior-nes, ok bió at Mána-aó nockora vetr. Síðan
rak Baoðolfr hann braut þaðan; ok nam hann þá fyr neðan Kalfaborgar-aó,
á miðle Fliótz ok Rauða-skriðo, ok bió at Mána-felle: hans son vas
Ketill, es átte Védíse [670] Þórbranz20 [[232: iii. 20.]] dóttor,
es keypte Rauða-skriðo-land at Mána: hans dótter vas Dalla, syster
Þórgeirs Galta sonar. Hána átte Þórvalldr [671] Hialta son.

4. Liótr Óþveginn hét maðr, es nam Keldo-hverfe upp frá Keldo-nese:
hans son vas Gríss, faðer Galta í Áse; hann vas vitr5 maðr, ok
víga-maðr mikill [672].

5. Onundr nam ok Keldo-hverfe upp frá Keldo-nese, ok bió í Áse:
hann vas son Bloeings Sóta sonar, bróðer Balca í Hrúta-firðe. Dótter
Onundar vas Þórbiaorg, es átte Hallgils Þórbranz son or Rauða-skriðo.10


21. 1. Þórsteinn sonr Sigmundar, Gnúpa Bárðar sonar, bió fyrst at
Mý-vatne. Hans son vas Þórgrímr, faðer Arnórs í Reykja-hlíð, es átte
Þórkotlo, dóttor Baoðvars, Hrólfs sonar or Gnúpo-felle. Þeirra son
vas Baoðvarr.

2. Þórkell enn Háve kom ungr til Íslannz; ok bió fyrst at15
Groena-vatne, es gengr af Mý-vatne. Hans son vas Sigmundr, es átte
Vígdíse, dóttor Þóris af Espi-hóle.--Hann vá Glúmr á akrenom [673]
Vitaz-giafa.--Dótter Þórkels vas Arndís, es átte Vígfúss, bróðer
Víga-Glúms. Þórkell gat son í elle sínne; sá hét Dagr; hann vas faðer
Þórarens [674], es átte Yngvilde, dóttor Hallz af Síðo, síðarr enn20
Eyjolfr enn Halte.

3. Geire hét maðr, es fyrr bió fyr sunnan Mý-vatn á Geira-staoðom:
[[234: iii. 20.]] hans son vas Glúmr scáld, ok Þórkell. Þeir Geire
feðgar baorðosk við Þórgeir Hoeggvin-kinna, ok feldo Þórstein son
hans. Fyr þat vog vóro þeir goerver norðan or sveitom. Geire sat um
vetr á Geira-staoðom við Húna-vatn. Síðan fóro þeir í Breiða-fiaorð,
ok bioggo á Geira-staoðom í Króks-firðe [675]. Glúmr feck5 Ingunnar,
dóttor Þórolfs, Véleifs sonar. Þeirra baorn vóro þau Þórðr, es átte
Goðrúno Usvifrs [676] dóttor; ok Þórgerðr, es átte Þórarenn Ingiallz
son: þeirra son Helgo-Steinarr.


22. 1. Torf-einarr iarl gat dóttor í oesko [677] sínne, sú hét Þórdís,
hána foedde Raognvalldr iarl, ok gifte hána10 Þórgeire Claufa:
þeirra son vas Einarr; hann fór til Orkneyja, at finna frændr sína;
þeir vildo eige taka við frændseme hans. Þá fór hann til Íslannz með
tveimr [678] broeðrom, Vestmanne ok Vémunde. Þeir siglðo fyr norðan
land, ok vestr um Slétto í fiaorðenn. Þeir setto oexe í Reistar-gnúp:
ok kaolloðo því OExar-fíaorð. Þeir setto15 aorn upp fyr vestan:
ok kaolloðo þar Arnar-þúfo. Enn í þriðja stað setto þeir cross:
þar kalla þeir Cross-ás. Svá helgoðo þeir ser allan OExar-fiaorð.

Baorn Einars vóro þau Eyjolfr, es Galte Grísar [679] son vá; ok Liót,
móðer Hróa ens Skarpa, es hefnde Eyjolfs, ok vá Galta. Syner20
Gliro-Halla, Brandr ok Bergr, vóro doetr-syner Liótar, es [680]
féllo í Baoðvars-dale.

[[235: III. 20.]]

2. Reistr hét maðr, son Biarneyja-Ketils, ok Hildar, systor Ketils
Þistils, faoðor Arnsteins Goða, hann nam land miðle Reistar-gnúps ok
Rauða-gnúps, ok bió í Leir-haofn.

3. Arngeirr hét maðr, es nam Slétto alla miðle Hávarar-lóns, ok
Sveinungs-víkr. Hans baorn vóro þau Þórgils, ok Oddr [681]; ok5 Þóríðr,
es Steinolfr í Þiórsár-dale átte.

4. Óddr vas elld-sætr í oersko ok seinligr, ok vas kallaðr
kol­bítr. Þeir Arngeirr ok Þórgils gengo heiman í fiúke at leita feár,
ok kvómo eige heim. Oddr fór at leita þeirra, ok fann þá báða oerenda,
ok hafðe hvíta-biaorn drepet þá [682], ok só or þeim blóðet [683].10
Oddr drap biaornenn, ok foerðe heim, ok át allan; ok kallaðesk þá
hefna faoðor síns, es hann drap biaornenn; en þá bróðor síns, es
hann át hann. Oddr vas síðan íllr ok údæll við at eige. Hann vas svá
miok hamramr, at hann geck heiman or Hraun-haofn um kveldet, en kom
um morgin efter í Þiórsár-dal, til liðs við Þóríðe15 systor sína,
es Þiórs-doeler vildo grýta hána fyrer fiol-kynge ok trollskap [684].

5. Sveinungr ok Colle naómo víkr þær es við þá ero kendar,
Sveinungs-vík ok Collz-vík.

6. Ketill hét maðr Þistill, íllr ok údæll; hann nam Þistils-fiaorð20
[[237: iv. 1.]] á miðle Húns-ness ok Sauða-ness. Hans son vas Sigmundr,
es land nam á Snæfellz-nese [685]. Hann vas faðer Laugar-brecko-Einars.

 [686]Nú ero ritin Land-naóm í Norðlendinga-fiorðunge.






III. Here beginneth the Settlement of the North-country-men's Quarter.

1. 1. Ey-stan Mein-fret, the son of Alf of Ost, took in settlement East
Ram-frith-strand, next after Balci, and dwelt there certain winters
before he went to settle in the Dales, and took to wife Thor-hild,
the daughter of Thor-stan the Red. Their sons were these: Alf-a-Dale,
Thord, and Thor-wolf, Ref [Fox] and Hrapp.

2. Thor-ord was the name of a man that took land in Ram-frith
in settlement, and dwelt at Thor-ord's-stead. His son was
Arn-or Tuft-nose, who had to wife Gerd, daughter of Bead-ware of
Bead-ware's-hills. Their sons were these: Thor-beorn whom Grette
slew, and Thor-ord Pæan-stump who made Un-fey's verses, the father of
Wal-gerd, whom Sceg Short-hand had to wife. He was the son of Gamle,
the son of Thord, the son of Ey-wolf, the son of Ey-here, the son of
Thor-wolf Fast-hold of Snow-fell. The son of Sceg Short-hand was Gamle,
the father of Alf-dis, the mother of Ord the monk.


2. 1. Scautad Sceg or Beard was the name of a nobleman in Norway. His
son was Beorn, who was called Skin-Beorn, for he was a traveller
to Holm-garth [where he carried on his trade]. He came to Iceland,
and took in settlement Mid-frith and Flax-acre-dale. His son was
Mid-frith Sceg; he was a great warrior [S: and merchant].

2. He harried in the Baltic, and lay in Denmark off Sea-land. He was
pitched on by lot to break into the barrow of king Hrod-wolf Crake;
and out of it he took Scofnung, the sword of Hrod-wolf, and the ax of
Hialte [Shelty], and much other riches; but he could not get Leaf [the
sword], for Bead-were was ready to make for him, but king Hrod-wolf
defended him [i.e. Sceg].

3. Afterwards he went to Iceland, and dwelt at Reeks in Mid-frith,
and had to wife Hall-bera, Grim's daughter. The sons of Sceg
were these: Eid [Aid], who had to wife Haf-thora, the daughter
of Thor-berg Cairn-mull and of A-lof Ellidi-shield, the sister of
Thor-gar Gollne. These had many children. Another son of Sceg was
Coll, the father of Hall-dor, the father of these,--Thor-dis, whom
poet Helge had to wife, and Thor-katla. Sceg's daughters were these:
Hrod-ny, whom Thord Gelle had to wife, and Thor-borg, whom Os-beorn
the Wealthy, the son of Haurd, had to wife. Their daughters were
Inge-borg, whom Illuge the Black, of Gil's-beck, had to wife. Their
sons were Gund-laug Worm-tongue, Hrod-mund, and Cetil.


3. 1. Harald Ring was the name of a man of great family. He came in
his ship to West-hope, and sat there the first winter near to the
place where he had landed, which is now called Ring-stead. He took in
settlement all Water-ness from seaward as far as Bond-maid's-river
to west, all the way up [south] to Thwart-water, and over across
to Brage-mouth, and on both sides of Crags north to the sea, and
dwelt at Hills. His son was Thor-brand, the father of Os-brand,
the father of Solwi the Proud [or Brude] of Egi-side, and also of
Thor-gar [i.e. Thor-brand's son] that dwelt at Hills. His daughter
was Ast-rid, whom Arn-mod Hedin's son had to wife. Hedin was the son
of them. Another daughter of Thor-gar was Thor-gerd, whom Thor-grim,
son of Peter of Oyce, had to wife.

2. Soti was the name of a man that took in settlement West-hope,
and dwelt under Soti-fell.


4. 1. Hound Stan-here was the name of an earl in England. He had to
wife A-lof, the daughter of Regin-here Lod-broc [Shaggy-breech]. Their
children were these: Beorn, the father of Ead-wine Shackle, and Eiric,
the father of Sig-rod Bladder-pate, and Is-gerd, whom earl Thore of
Werm-land had to wife.

Ead-wine Shackle came to Iceland, and took Willow-dale in settlement,
and dwelt at Ead-wine's-stead. With him there came out Thor-gils
Geller, his fellow, the father of Thor-arin gode. Ead-wine Shackle was
the father of Thora Moss-neck, the mother of Wolf-hild, whom God-brand
Cula had to wife. Their daughter was Asta, the mother of king Olaf
the Saint. [Two lines blank.] The son of Ead-wine Shackle was As-gar
of As-gar-river. He had to wife Ior-unth or Ear-wynd, the daughter of
Ingi-mund the Old. Their children were these: Thor-wald, the father
of Dalla [the Blind], the mother of bishop Gizor; and Ead-wine, the
father of As-gar, the father of Ead-wine, the father of Egil, who had
to wife Wolf-hild, the daughter of Ey-wolf Gud-mund's son [lat. add.],
and it was their son Ey-wolf that was slain at the All-Moot, the
father of Worm the chaplain of bishop Thor-lac the Saint. Another
son of Ead-wine Shackle was Ey-stan, father of Thor-stan, the father
of Helge, the father of Thor-worm, the father of Ord, the father of
Hall-beorn, the father of priest Sigh-wat. The daughter of As-gar of
As-gar's-river was Thor-borg the Pride-of-the-Bench.

2. Worm was the name of a man that took in settlement Worms-dale,
and dwelt there. He was the father of Ord, the father of Thor-wald
[S: Thor-ord], the father of Helge, the father of Harre, the father
of Iora, the mother of Thor-dis, the mother of Tand [Tadg], the father
of Skafte [Shafto].


5. 1. Cetil the Ream was the name of a noble herse or lord of
Ream's-dale in Norway. He was the son of Worm Shell-mull, the son of
Hors-beorn, the son of Ream, the son of Iotun-beorn [Ettyn-Beorn], out
of the north of Norway. Cetil had to wife Miolla, the daughter of An
the Bow-swayer. Their son's name was Thor-stan. He slew in a wood of
the Uplands, at the egging of his father [Cetil], Iockle, the son of
earl Ingi-mund of Gaut-land and of Wigdis. Iockle gave him his life;
and afterwards he took to wife Thor-dis his [Iockle's] sister.

Their son was Ingi-mund the Old. He was brought up in the isle
Hefne with Thori, the father of Grim and Hrod-mund. Heid the Sibyl
prophesied to them all that they should settle in a land that was
as yet undiscovered west over the sea. But Ingi-mund said that he
would not do that. But the Sibyl declared that he would not be able
to help it; and also told this, as a token, that the lot or teraph
would disappear out of his purse, saying that he would find it when
he dug a place to set up his porch-pillars in that land.

2. Ingi-mund was a great wicking or warrior, and harried in the west
on wicking cruises. Sæ-mund was the name of his fellow or partner,
a Southrey-man. They came back from warring at the time that king
Harold was coming to the land and going forth to the battle in
Hafr's-frith against Thore Long-chin and his fellows. Ingi-mund
was minded to give help to the king, but not Sæ-mund; and the two
partners parted there. After the battle king Harold gave in wedlock
to Ingi-mund Wig-dis, the daughter of earl Thore the Silent. She and
Eor-wend Halse or Neck were his children by his leman. Ingi-mund could
find no peace, wherefore king Harold would have had him seek his fate
in Iceland, but Ingi-mund said that he had never been minded to do
so. Nevertheless he sent two Fins to go to Iceland to get back his
lot or teraph, which was a Frey made of silver. The Fins came back,
and they had found the teraph, but could not get it. They told that
it was in a dale between three [two] holts, and they told him how all
the land lay, and of what kind it was which he was to settle in there.

After this Ingi-mund got ready to go to Iceland, and Eor-wend Neck
with him, his brother-in-law; and Ey-wind Sarcwe and As-mund and Hwate
his friends; and his thralls, Frith-mund and Bead-were and Thore,
Rof-sceg and Wolf-kell. They made Grim's-river-mouth in the south
of the land, and stayed the winter through in Hwan-eyre with Grim,
Ingi-mund's sworn brother. But in the spring they went north over the
heath. They came into a frith, where they found two rams, and called
it therefore Ram-frith. Then they went north over the country round,
and named places far and wide. In the winter he stayed in Willow-dale
at Ingi-mund's-holt: thence they could see a snowless mountain to the
south-east, and went that way in the spring. Then Ingi-mund saw and
knew the land that had been pointed out to him. Thor-dis his daughter
was born at Thor-dis-holt.

3. Ingi-mund took in settlement all Water-dale up from Helge-mere
and Wierd-mere in the east. He dwelt at Temple, and found his teraph
there as he was digging to set up his porch-pillars. Thor-stan was
the son of him and Wig-dis, and [also] Iockle and Thore Goat-thigh,
and Hagene. Smith was the name of the son of Ingi-mund and a bondmaid,
and his daughters were Eor-wynd and Thor-dis.

4. Eor-wend Halse or Neck took in settlement land west of Horst-mere
and up to Mo-gils-beck, and dwelt at Ground under Eor-wend-fell. His
son was Mar [Mór] of Mar-stead.

5. Hwate took land west from Mo-gils-beck to Gills, and dwelt at
Hwate-stead.

6. As-mund took in settlement land west from Helge-mere over the
Thing-eyre country, and dwelt under Peak.

7. Frith-mund took in settlement For-sun-dale.

8. Ey-wind Sorcwe took in settlement Blond-dale. His sons were Her-mund
and Hrod-mund Halt.

9. Ingi-mund lit upon a white she-bear, and two cubs with her, on a
mere there, and called it Cub-mere. After that Ingi-mund went abroad,
and gave the bears to king Harold. White bears had never been seen
before in Norway. Then king Harold gave Ingi-mund the ship Stepper,
with a cargo of wood aboard of her, and he sailed back to Iceland
with his two ships; and sailed the north-west course round the Skaw
first of all men, and held on his way to Cub-mere, to a place that
is now called Stepper-dock, hard by Thing-eyre.

After this Raven the Eastman stayed with Ingi-mund, and he had a good
sword, and carried it into the Temple; wherefore Ingi-mund took it
from him.

10. Hall-worm and Thor-orm, two brethren, came out and stayed
with Ingi-mund. Then Hall-worm took to wife Thor-dis, Ingi-mund's
daughter, and then followed her hence as her marriage portion
Cairn's-water-land. Their son was Thor-grim, the Cairn's-water
gode. Thor-orm dwelt at Thor-orm's-tongue.

11. Ingi-mund lost ten swine, and they were found the next harvest-tide
in Swine-dale, and there were then a hundred swine together. The boar
was called Beigad [....]; he leapt into Swine-mere, and swam till
his hooves fell off, and he died of exhaustion at Beigad's hillock
or knoll.

12. Hrod-laf the Big, and Leot his mother, came out and put into
Borg-frith. They went north over the country side, and got no
steadfast abode till they got to Sæmunds in Shaw-frith. Hrod-laf
was the son of Arn-old, the brother of Sæmund, wherefore he directed
them north to Thord at Head-strand, and he gave him [Hrod-laf] land
in Hrod-laf's-dale, and there he dwelt. Hrod-laf beguiled Hrod-ny,
the daughter of Una [Unadh] of Unad's-dale. Ord, Una's son, waylaid
him, and slew Leot his sister's son; but wounded Hrod-laf himself on
the foot, for iron would not bite on his kirtle. Hrod-laf slew Ord
and two of his men beside, but two got away. For this Thord o' Head
made him and his mother outlaws in the hundred, as far as the rivers
ran into Shaw-frith. Then Sæmund sent Hrod-laf to Ingi-mund the Old;
he set him down at Ord's-ridge, over against Temple.

He had a fishery in Water-dale-river with Ingi-mund; and the Temple
men had the first right of going on the river to fish. But Hrod-laf
would not yield the river to the sons of Ingi-mund, and they fought
across the river. This was told to Ingi-mund, who was then blind, and
he bade a sheep-boy lead his horse under him to the river between them
[where they were fighting]. Hrod-laf cast a spear and hit him, and then
he and the boy turned home. Ingi-mund sent the boy to tell Hrod-laf;
and he was dead in his high seat when his sons came home. Hrod-laf
told his mother; and she said it should be tried whether the luck
of Ingi-mund's sons or her knowledge [magic] should prevail; but
bade him first go away. Thor-stan was set to espy after Hrod-laf,
for which he was to get his choice out of the heritage. Ingi-mund's
sons would not sit in the high seat after their father. They went
north to Gar-mund, and Thor-stan gave him sixty pieces of silver
to thrust Hrod-laf away. Ingi-mund's sons tracked his slot from
the north over Neck to Water-dale. Thor-stan sent his house-carle
to the Ridge to spy. He said that he could say twelve verses ere
they answered the door. He saw a pile of clothes by the door-posts,
and from under it a red coat sticking out. Thor-stan said that must
have been Hrod-laf, and that Leot must have sacrificed to get him a
long life. They went up to Ridge, and Thor-stan wished to waylay the
door, sitting above it; but could not, because of Iockle, who wished
to sit there. A man walked out and craned about; and the second man
that came out led Hrod-laf after him. Iockle sprang up, and fell
down off the wood-stack, but yet was able to cast the kevel to his
brethren [as a sign]. He made for Hrod-laf, and they both rolled
down the slope, but Iockle was uppermost. Then Thor-stan came up,
and they took to their weapons. By this time Leot had got out,
and she was walking backward; she had her head between her legs,
and her clothes up over her back. Iockle cut off Hrod-laf's head,
and cast it in Leot's face. Then she said that she was come too late,
'and if I had come sooner, the earth would have turned over before
the look of my eyes, and ye should all have gone mad.'

13. After that Thor-stan chose Temple-land; but Iockle kept the sword,
and dwelt at Tongue. Thore had the gode-ship or priesthood, and dwelt
at Undern-fell [Afternoon-fell], and went Bearsack's way [became
mad at times]. Hagene had Stepper, and was a merchant-shipper. Smith
dwelt at Smith-stead. Thor-stan had to wife Thor-rid, the priestess,
the daughter of Sol-mund of Os-beorn's-ness. Their sons were Ing-wolf
the Fair and Gud-brand. Iockle was the son of Bard, Iockle's son,
whom king Olaf the Saint had slain. Iockle, the highway-man, had
said that unkindly or unlucky slaughter should long hold in their
family. [Space of four lines, though nothing seems to be missing.]

14. Ey-wind Aud-cula was the name of a man that took in settlement
Swine-dale, and dwelt at Aud-cula-stead.

15. Thor-gils the Yeller dwelt at Swine-mere. He had come out with
Ead-wine Shackle. His sons were these: Fat-Orm and his brethren,
that slew Sharp-hedin We-fred's son at Water's-scard or Mere-pass.

16. Ey-wind Sorcwe took in settlement Bland-dale, as it is
written before. His son was Hrod-mund the Halt, who slew Hagene,
Ingi-mund's son, when Mór and the sons of Ingi-mund were fighting over
Feud-shelf, wherefore he was made an outlaw in the North-country-men's
Quarter. His sons were these: Thor-beorn and Heah-stan, that fought
with Sleight-Helge in Ram-frith. Another son of Ey-wind Sorcwi
was Her-mund, the father of Hilda, whom A-wald Ingi-ald's son had
to wife. Their children were these: Col-finna, whom Gris Sæming's
son had to wife, and Brand, who slew Galte Oht-here's son at the
Cub-mere-moot for a lampoon of Hall-fred's.

17. Thor-beorn Colcan [Colgan] was the name of a man that took in
settlement Colca-mire, and dwelt there as long as he lived.


6. 1. Æw-here was the name of a man, the son of Cetil Slate-flag,
and of Thor-rid, the daughter of king Harold Gold-beard of Sogn. The
sons of Æw-here were We-fred and [S: his bastard sons] Carle, and
Thor-beorn Stew, and Thord the Big. Æw-here went to Iceland from his
wicking cruises, with all his sons save We-fred. He stayed behind
on wicking cruises. With him there came out Gund-stan his kinsman,
and Ead-wolf, and Geat.

Æw-here came in his ship to Blond-mouth. At that time all the land was
taken and settled west of River Blond. Æw-here went up along River
Blond to seek him a place to take and settle in, and reached the
place which is called Mo-bergs-brink. He set up a high pole there,
and declared that he took a place for a homestead there for We-fred
his son. Then he took all Long-dale up thence, and so along to the
mouth of the Neck. There he gave out land among his shipmates. Æw-here
dwelt at Æw-here-pass.

2. We-fred came out later, and landed at the mouth of Gong-scard-water
or Gong-pass-river, and went thence south to his father, and Æw-here
did not know him. They wrestled so that every pillar in the house was
torn up before We-fred said who he was.  He set up housekeeping at
Mo-berg, as was settled beforehand, and Thor-beorn Stew at Stew-stead,
and Gund-stan at Gund-stan-stead, Carle at Carle-stead, Thord Mickle
at Mickle-stead, Ead-wolf at Ead-wolf-stead.

3. Geat settled at Geat's-dale. He was one-handed. Ey-wind Sorcwe
and he did for themselves, for they would not live after Ingi-mund
the Old. Hawk dwelt at the place that is called Hawk-stead. We-fred
had to wife Gund-hild, daughter of Eiric of God-dales, the sister of
Battle-Wager-Starre. Their sons were these: Wolf-hedin, whom Fast-wolf
and Thrott-wolf slew at Grind-beck; and Scarp-hedin, whom Orm the Fat
and his fellows slew at Water-pass; and Hun-red, the father of Mór,
the father of Hafledi.

4. Hollte was the name of a man that took in settlement Lang-dale down
from Mo-berg, and dwelt at Holte-stead. He was the father of Is-red,
the father of Is-laf, the father of Thor-wald, the father of Thor-arin
the Sage. Thor-wald's daughter was Thor-dis, whom Hall-dor, the son
of Snorri gode, had to wife. Their daughters were these: Thor-katla,
whom Gud-laug, Thor-fin's son of Stream-frith, had to wife, whence
are the Sturlungs come and the Ord-biders; the other was Gud-run,
whom Ceartan, the son of As-gar of Water-frith, had to wife. Their
son was Thor-wald, the father of Thord o' Water-frith, and Inge-rid,
whom Gud-laug the priest had to wife.

5. Wager-Battle-Moon was the name of a man that took in settlement
Shaw-strand from the west into Moon-tump, and dwelt at Moon-wick. His
daughter Thor-brand-a-Dale had to wife, the father of Moon, the father
of Calf the poet.

6. Ei-lif Erne was the name of a man, the son of Atle, the son of
Scid the Old, the son of Bard of Al. Ei-lif took land in settlement
from Moon-tump to Gong-scard-water and Lax-water-dale, and dwelt
there. He had to wife Thor-laug, the daughter of Sæ-mund o'
Lithe. Their sons were these: Sol-mund, the father of Gud-mund,
the father of Slaughter-Bard and his brethren. Another son was
Atle the Strong, who had to wife Her-dis, the daughter of Thord o'
Head. Their children were these: Thor-laug, whom Gud-mund the Mighty
had to wife, and Thor-arin, who had to wife Halla, the daughter of
Eor-wend Neck. Their son was Styr-beorn, who had to wife Yngw-hild,
the daughter of Stan-red, the son of Hedin of Hedin's-head. Their
daughter was Erne-dis or Arn-dis, whom Hamal, the son of Thor-mod,
the son of Thor-kell, had to wife. The son of Ei-lif Erne was Codran
o' Gills-water, the father of Thor-wald the Far-farer, and Theod-wolf
gode of Temple on Shaw-strand, and Ey-stan, the father of Thor-wald
Tin-tan and of Thor-stan Heathman-ing, and Erne o' Fleet.


7. 1. Sæ-mund o' the Southreys [Sodor Islands], the fellow or partner
of Ingi-mund the Old, as hath been written before, came hither in his
ship to the mouth of Gong-scard-river. Sæ-mund took in settlement all
Sæ-mund-lithe as far as Water-pass down from Sæ-mund-beck, and dwelt at
Gar-mund-stead. His son was Gar-mund that dwelt there afterwards. The
daughter of Sæ-mund was Regin-bera, whom Thor-ord Helm had to
wife. Their daughter was Hall-bera, the mother of Gudmund the Mighty,
the father of Ey-wolf, the father of Thor-ey, the mother of Sæ-mund
the historian. Arnold was the name of another son of Sæ-mund. He was
the father of Riupa [Caper-cailzie], whom Thor-gar, the son of Thord o'
Head, had to wife. Their son was Hall-dor of Temple.

2. Scefil was the name of a man that came in his ship into the mouth
of Gong-scard-water in the same week as Sæ-mund. But while Sæ-mund
was carrying fire about his settlement, Scefil took in settlement all
the land west of Sheep-river, taking it out of Sæ-mund's settlement
without his leave; but Sæ-mund let it stand so.

3. Wolf-leot was the name of a man that took in settlement Lang-holt,
all down from Sæ-mund's-beck.

4. Thor-kell Wingne, the son of Atle, the son of Scide the Old. He
took land in settlement all over Water-dale and Swart-water-dale. His
son was Arn-mod Squint, the father of Galte, the father of Thor-gar,
the father of Styrme, the father of Hall, the father of Col-fina.

5. Elf-gar was the name of a man that took land in settlement
in Elf-gar's-field and up to Meal-fell-water, and dwelt at
Elf-gar's-field.

6. There was a man whose name was Thor-wide that took land in
settlement up from Meal-fells-water to Gills-water.

7. Horse-kell was the name of a man that took in settlement all
Swart-water-dale and all Yra-fells-land with the counsel of Eiric. He
took in settlement up to Gil-haye, and dwelt at Yra-fell. He had a
thrall that was called Roth-ric. He sent him up along Meal-fell-dale in
quest of land south on the Keel. He came to a gill that turned south
out of Meal-fell-dale, which is now called Roth-ric's-gill. There
he set up a fresh barked staff, which they called Land-kenner or
Land-searcher, and after that he turned back again.

8. We-kell [Cetil] the Skin-strong [lycanthrope] was the name of a
man that took land down from Gills to Meal-fell-ness, and dwelt at
Meal-fell. He got news of the journey of Roth-ric; and a little later
he went south on the fell in quest of land, and came to the barrows
that are now called We-kell's howes. He cast [his spear or arrow]
between the barrows, and then turned back again.

But when Eiric of God-dale got news of this, he sent his thrall,
whose name was Rongud, southward on the fell. He too went to seek
out land. He came south to Blond-springs, and then went up along
the river that falls from the west of Hwin-ware-dale and west on
to the lava or rawn between Reek-field and Keel, and there came on
a man's slots or tracks, and guessed that they must have come from
the south. He piled up a cairn there, which is now called Rongud's
cairn. From this place he went back, and Eiric gave him his freedom
for his journey. But thenceforward there came about journeying over
the mountains between the South-country-men and the North-country-men.


8. 1. Eiric was the name of a nobleman. He came out of Norway to
Iceland. He was the son of Hrod-wald, the son of Gar-mund, the son of
Eiric Ordig-beardie. Eiric took land in settlement from Gills, over all
God-dale, and down to North-water, and dwelt at Temple in God-dale. He
had to wife Thor-rid, the daughter of Thord-beardie, the sister of
Helge, whom Cetil-beorn the Old of Moss-fell had to wife. The children
of her and Eiric were these: Thor-kell and Hrod-wald, Thor-gar and
Battle-wager Starre, and daughter Gund-hild. Thor-gar Eiric's son had
to wife Yngw-hild, Thor-gar's daughter. Their daughter was Rand-weig,
whom Beorn-beord Helge's son had to wife. We-fred Æw-here's son had
to wife Gund-hild, Eiric's daughter.

2. Crow Hred-here was the name of a man, the son of Un-fey Hang-beard,
the son of Oxen-Thori. He and his father made ready their ship and
sailed to Iceland; and when they came in sight of land Hred-here
went to the mast, and declared that he would not throw overboard the
porch-pillars, saying that he would rather make a vow to Thunder or
Thor, that he would point out to him the land he was to settle in;
and he declared that he would fight for it, if it were already taken
in settlement by another. And he put into Shaw-frith, and sailed up to
Borg-sand, and ran his ship ashore. Haward Heron came to him, and asked
him to his house, and he was there through the winter at Heron-ness.

3. In the spring Haward asked him what he meant to do; but he said
that he had a mind to fight with Sæ-mund for land. But Haward spoke
against this, and said that it would turn out ill; and bade him go to
see Eiric o' God-dales and take counsel of him, 'for he is the wisest
man in this country.' Hred-here did so; and when he found Eiric,
he spoke against such a breach of the peace [as this would be],
and said that it was a thing not to be spoken of that men should
be in feud when there was such lack of men in the country; and
[furthermore] he said, that he would rather give him all the Tongue
down from Hall-mire, saying that Thunder had directed him thither,
and that his prow had pointed thither as he sailed to Borg-sand,
and that this country would be enough and to spare for him and his
sons. Hred-here took this advice, and dwelt at Stan-stead. He wished
to die into Meal-fell. His son was Un-fey Thin-beard, the father of
Beorn, the father of Stan o' Tongue.

4. There was a man called Helm-wolf that took land in settlement
down over Blond-lithe. His son was Thor-grim Cog, the father of
Ord in Shoulder-hay, the father of Seal-Calf.  Thence are come the
Shoulder-hay-men.

5. Ean-wend the Wise was the name of a man that took land in settlement
up from Mark-gill, all the East-dale from the east. But when Eiric
wished to go and take in settlement the whole dale from the west,
Ean-wend cast the sacrificial rods or chips, so that he should know the
time when Eiric was about to take it in settlement; and then Ean-wend
was the quicker, and shot a [burning] tinder-arrow across the river,
and hallowed to himself the land from the west, and dwelt between
the rivers.

6. Care was the name of a man that took land in settlement between
North-water and Mark-gill, and dwelt at Flat-tongue. From him are
come the Silver-stead-men.

7. Thor-brand Orrec [.....] took land in settlement up from
Bolster-river, all Silver-stead-side, and all North-water-dale from the
north, and dwelt at Thor-brand-stead; and let build there a fire-house
or hall so great that all the men that went that way over the dale
might drive their pack-horses through, and there was meat free for
all. After him Orrec-stead is called up from Hawk-stead. He was a
well-born man, and of great family.

8. Thore Dove-neb was a freedman of Oxen-Thore. He came in his ship
into the mouth of Gong-scard-water. The whole country side to the west
was settled ere this; so he went north over Iockle-water to Land-slip,
and took land in settlement between Gleed-blast-water and Deep-water,
and dwelt at Fly-mere.

9. At that time there came out a ship into the mouth of Colban's-river
oyce-mouth laden with live stock, and they lost in Brine-ness-shaw a
young mare; and Thore Dove-neb bought the chance of finding her, and
found her. She was the swiftest of all horses, and was called Fly. Erne
was the name of a man that went about the land from point to point [a
vagrant]; he was a wizard. He waylaid Thore in Win-ware-dale, against
his riding south off the Keel, and wagered with Thore as to which of
them had the better horse, for he had a very good stallion; and each
of them laid 100 pieces of silver. They both rode south over the Keel,
till they came to a course which is now called Dove-neb's-course;
but there was such great difference between the horses, that Thore
[had turned, and] was coming to meet Erne [who was no more than]
half way up the course. Erne took the loss of his wager so to heart,
that he would not live any longer; and he went up under a fell that
is now called Erne's-fell, and did away with himself. But as for Fly,
she was left at Dove-neb's-course, for she was very tired; and when
Thore came back from the Moot [June], he found a grey and dark-maned
stallion with her. She was big with foal by him, and from these sprang
Eith-fax, which was sent abroad, and was seven men's death at Miors
[the lake in Norway] in one day, and perished there. Fly was lost in
a moss at Fly-mire.

10. Col-swegen the Strong was the name of a man that took land
in settlement between Thwart-water and Chine-river, and dwelt at
Col-swegen-stead; but he held his sacrifices at Temple-stead.

11. Gund-wolf was the name of a man that took land in settlement
between Thwart-water and Gled-blast-water, and dwelt at Hwam or Cambe.


9. 1. Gorm or Guth-thorm was the name of a noble lord or herse in
Swee-ric [S: Swee-theod]. He had to wife Thora, the daughter of king
Eiric at Up-sala. Their son was called Thor-gils. He had to wife
Eilina [Helena], the daughter of Buris-slaf [Bogi-slav] king of Garth
[Novgorod] in the east, and of Ingi-gerd, sister of Dag-stygg, king
of the Risa [Russians]. Their sons were these: Her-grim and Her-fin,
who had to wife Halla, daughter of Hedin and of Arn-dis or Erne-dis
Hedin's daughter. The daughters of Her-fin were Groa [Gruoch] and
Halla, whom Hrod-gar had to wife.

2. Their son was Beorn o' the Plain, that took land in settlement
first between Grit-water and Feud-water before Shelty and Colban came
out. He dwelt at Plain-Beorn-stead. His children were Erne-wolf, that
had Thor-leot, daughter of Shelty Scapl's son to wife; and Arn-beorn or
Erne-beorn, that had to wife Thor-laug, daughter of Thord o' Head; and
Arn-ord, that had to wife Thor-ny, daughter of Sig-mund Thor-kel's son,
that slew Glum. Arn-fred or Erne-fred was the name of Plain-Beorn's
daughter, whom Sage Bead-were, the son of Aundott, had to wife.

3. Aundott came out to the mouth of Colban's-river, and bought
land of Plane-beorn, down from Neck-pit west way and east up to
Colban's-river-mouth, and on the east way down from the brook that
springs out from Neat-by and runs east to Chine river, and he dwelt
at Wood-wick.

4. Sig-mund of West-fold had to wife Ingi-borg, the daughter of
Red-Rug of Neam-dale, the sister of Thor-stan Swarfed. Their son was
Colban. He journeyed to Iceland, and took land in settlement between
Grit and Feud-water, Colban's-dale and Shelty-dale.


10. 1. Shelty or Sholto, the son of Thord Scapl, came to Iceland and
took in settlement Shelty-dale, by counsel of Colban, and dwelt at
Temple. His sons were these: Thor-wald and Thord, noblemen.

2. It was the noblest arval ever held in Iceland that they held over
their father. They bade all the chiefs in Iceland. There were twelve
hundred guests [1440], and all men of worship were led on their
way with gifts. At this arval Ord, the Broad-frith man, recited the
Encomium which he had made on Shelty. Glum Garasson had summoned Ord
to Torsk-frith-moot for rent (?) before this came to pass, and in
the spring the sons of Shelty went from the north in their ship to
Stan-grim's-frith, and then walked south over the Heath by what is
now called Shelt-dale-dip, and when they walked into the moot they
were so well equipped that men thought that the Anses were come there,
whereon this was repeated:--



    No man thought but that the most glorious Anses were coming,
    When the armed sons of noble Shelty marched into Torsk-firth moot.


        [See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 62.]


From the Shelty sons is come a great [S: and high-born] family.


11. 1. Thord was the name of a nobleman in Norway. He was the son of
Beorn Butter-keg, the son of Hrod-wald Ryg [the Rugian?], the son of
As-lac or Os-lac, the son of Beorn Ironside, the son of Regin-here
Lod-broc. Thord went to Iceland, and took in settlement Head-strand
in Shaw-frith, between Unadh-dale-water and Hrod-laf-dale-river,
and dwelt at Head.

2. Thord had to wife Frid-gerd, the daughter of Thore Hima [...] and
of Frid-gerd, daughter of Cear-fal [Cearbhall], king of the Irish. They
had nineteen children.

Beorn was a son of theirs, he that had to wife Thor-rid, the daughter
of Ref of Bard, and their children were Arn-thor Carling-neb, and
Thor-dis, mother of Worm, the father of Thor-dis, the mother of Bot-olf
[Bead-wolf].

Thor-gar was the name of another son of Thord's. He had to wife Riupa
[Caper-cailzie], the daughter of Arn-old, the son of Sæ-mund. Their
son was Hall-dor of Temple.

Snorre was the third. He had to wife Thor-hild Riupa [Caper-cailzie],
the daughter of Thord-Gelli. Their son was Thord Horse-head, the
father of Carle's-efni, that found Wine-land the Good [America],
the father of Snorri.

Thor-wald Hollow-weazand was the fourth son of Thord. He came
one harvest-tide to Thor-wald-stead in Side, to Smith-cell [Cathal
Gowe], and dwelt there for some time. It was then that he went up to
Swart's-cave and repeated there an Encomium that he had made on the
Giant in the Cave. Afterwards he took to wife a daughter of Smith-cell
[Cathal Gowe], and their daughter was Ior-unn, the mother of Thor-brand
of Scarf-ness.

Bard was Thord's fifth son. He had to wife Thor-orna, the daughter
of Thor-ord Helm. Their son was Dagæ [S: Dade] the poet.

Sax-wolf was Thord's sixth son; the seventh Thor-grim; the eighth
Rod-gar; the ninth Cnorr; the tenth Thor-mod the Bald; the eleventh
Stan.

Thord's daughters were these: Thor-laug, whom Arn-beorn Plain-beorn's
son had to wife; their daughter was Gud-laug, whom Thor-lac Hos-Coll's
son had to wife; their son was Bolle. The second of Thord's daughters
was Her-dis, whom Atle the Strong had to wife. Thor-grima Galley-cheek
was the third; Arn-borg the fourth; As-gerd the fifth; An-leva the
sixth; Thor-rid the seventh; Frid-gerd of Hwam the eighth.

3. Hrod-laf the Big dwelt in Hrod-laf's-dale, as was before written,
before Thord drove him out of the north for the slaying of Ord Unason;
then he went into Water-dale.

4. Frid-laf was the name of a man that was Geatish on his father's
side, but Bryn-gerd was the name of his mother, and she was a Flemish
woman. Frid-laf took in settlement all Plain-lithe and Frid-laf-dale,
between Frid-laf-dale-river and Staff, and dwelt at Holt. His son
was Theod-here, the father of Are and of Bryn-gerd, the mother of
Stan o' Tongue.

5. Floke, the son of Wil-gerd, the daughter of Haurd-Care, journeyed to
Iceland, and took in settlement Floke-dale, between Floke-dale-river
and Reek-hill. He dwelt at Moe. Floke had to wife Groa, the sister of
Thord o' Head. Their son was Ord-laf Staff, that dwelt at Staff-holt,
and had a feud with the Shelty-sons. Floke's daughter was Theod-gerd,
the mother of Codran, the father of Theod-gerd, the mother of Codran,
the father of Care of Water-dale.


12. 1. Thord Knop was the name of a man, Sognish [or Swedish] by race,
the sister's son [Sison] of Beorn o' the Howe; and another son of
theirs was named Nave-Helge. They both journeyed to Iceland in the
same ship, and put in at Hay-ness. Thord took in settlement land up
from Stifle to Tongue-river, and dwelt at Knop-stead. He had to wife
Asa, daughter of Leot-wolf gode. Their son was Hafr [He-goat], who
had to wife Thu-rid, the daughter of Thor-kell of God-dales. Their
son was Thor-arin, the father of Un-fey.

2. Nave-Helge took land in settlement eastward up from Hay-ness
to Floke-dale-river, below Bard, and up to Tongue-river, and dwelt
at Grindle. He had to wife Gro [Gruoch] the Second-sighted. Their
children were these: Thor-wolf Carle-head; and the second Arnor [Arun,
Orran?], that fought with Frid-laf at Staff-hill; and Thor-gerd,
whom Gar-mund Sæ-mund's son had to wife; and Wolf-hild [S: All-hild],
whom Arnor, Skevil's son, of Gang-pass, had to wife. Their son was
Thor-gar the Over-weening, that slew Mar o' the Offerings that dwelt
at Moe-berg. Thor-wen Blue-cheek was one....

3. Bard, a Southreyman, took land in settlement up from Stifle to
Slim-dale-river. His son was Hall Slim-daling, the father of Thor-rid,
whom Arnor Carling-neb had to wife.

4. Brune the White was the name of a nobleman, the son of Heah-rec
the Uplandmen's earl. He came to Iceland of his own will, and took
land in settlement between Slim-dale-river and Wolf-dale. He dwelt at
Brune-stead. He had to wife Arn-ora, daughter of Thor-gar the Mad,
son of Leod-wolf gode. Their sons were Cetil, and Wolf-hedin, and
Thord, whence the Bard-biders are come.

5. Wolf the Wicking and Anlaf Bench came to Iceland in the same
ship. Wolf took in settlement Wolf-dale, and dwelt there.

6. Anlaf Bench was the son of Carle of Birch-ey in Haleygo-land. He
slew Thore the Black, and was outlawed therefore. Anlaf took in
settlement all the dales on the west, and Anlaf's-frith from the south
to match with Thor-mod's-land; and he dwelt at Quhae-beck. His sons
were these: Stan-mod, the father of Beorn, and Grim-wolf, and Arn-ord,
the father of Wil-borg, the mother of Carl the Red.

7. Thor-mod the Strong was the name of a Sweenish [Sognish?] man. He
slew Gurth, the mother's father of Scialg [Squint] of Iadar, and was
therefore cast out of the land by king Beorn o' Howe. He journeyed
to Iceland, and came in his ship to Mast-frith, and sailed up it as
far as Thor-mod's-eyre, and gave the names Mast-frith and Mast-ness to
those places accordingly. He took in settlement all Mast-frith, between
Wolf-dale and Hwan-dale or Angelica-dale. He dwelt on Mast-ness. He
had a feud with Anlaf Bench over Hwan-dale, and was the death of
seventeen men before he and Anlaf were set at peace with each other,
each agreeing to have it summer about. Thor-mod was the son of Harold
Wicking. He had to wife Arn-gerd or Erne-gerd, the daughter of Scid
of Scid-dale. Their sons were these: Arn-gar the Keen, and Narfe,
the father of Throwend, the father of Risey-Narfe, and Al-ric that
fought at Plain-lithe against Cnor Thord's son.

8. Gund-wolf the Old, the son of Thor-beorn Thud out of Sogn. He slew
We-gar the father of We-beorn, the champion of the Sogners, and then
went out to Iceland. He took in settlement Anlaf's-frith eastward to
Reek-water, and west to Wo-mull, and dwelt at Gund-wolf's-river. He
had to wife Groa, the daughter of Thor-wald of Hurst. Their sons were
Stan-wolf, and Thore, and Thor-grim.


13. 1. Beorn was the name of a nobleman in Geat-land, the son of
Hrodwolf-a-River. He had to wife Hlifa, daughter of Hrod-wolf, the
son of Ingi-ald, the son of king Frode. Starcad the Old was poet to
both of them [Ingi-ald and Frode]. Ey-wind was the name of their son.

2. Beorn had a quarrel over a piece of land with Sig-fast, the
father-in-law of Sol-were, the king [earl?] of the Geats. Sig-fast gave
his daughter in wedlock to Sol-were, and the earl helped Sig-fast so
well, that he kept hold of all Beorn's lands by the strong hand. Then
Beorn handselled to his wife Hlifa and his son Ey-wind all his goods
in Geat-land, and set out from the east with twelve horses laden with
silver; and the night before he left the country he burnt Sig-fast
in his house and thirty men with him, and then he journeyed west
into Norway with twelve men into Agd to Hwin to Grim the herse,
the son of Col-beorn Snib, the brother of Ingi-ald the Trusty, the
kinsman of Arin-beorn o' the Friths; and Grim received him very
well. Beorn and his companions were with him all the winter; but
when the spring was coming on, one night Beorn was aware of a man
standing over him with a drawn sword, with which he struck at him,
but Beorn caught his hand. This man had taken a fee of Grim to bring
him Beorn's head. Beorn did not slay him. Grim had wished to slay him
treacherously to get his money. Wherefore Beorn went away and came
to Ondott Crow, the son of Erling Knit, that dwelt at Hwin-frith in
Agd. Ondott had to wife Sig-ny, the daughter of Sig-wat of Lithe, out
of the east of Wick. Beorn went forth to the west on wicking cruises
in the summers, and stayed with Ondott through the winters. At this
time Hlifa died in Geat-land, and then Beorn took to wife Helga,
Ondott's sister. Their son was Throwend the Far-sailer. Afterwards
Ey-wind came out of the east to his father Beorn; he was the son of
Hlifa. He took over the war-ships of his father, and the way of life
he followed, when Beorn gave up going a warring.

Afterwards Ey-wind took to wife in Ireland Raforta [.....], the
daughter of Cear-val [Cear-bhall]. She gave birth to a boy in the
Southreys, and put him out to fosterage there. Two winters later they
came back to the Islands [Sodor] to see the boy, and saw a boy there,
with fair eyes, but there was no flesh on him, for he was starved;
and so they called the boy Helge the Lean. He was afterwards put into
fosterage in Ireland. Ey-wind was called the Ost-man or East-man,
because he came west over sea out of Sweeric [Sweden] in the east.

3. Beorn died at the house of Ondott, his brother-in-law, but Grim
said that the king ought to take all his inheritance [as aubaine],
because he was a stranger, and his son was away west over sea. But
Ondott kept the inheritance on behalf of Throw-end, his sister's son.

Helge was brought up in Ireland. He took to wife Thor-wen Hyrna,
daughter of Cetil Flat-neb of the Southreys, and of Yngw-hild,
daughter of Cetil Wether of Ring-ric, and they had many children.


14. 1. Afterwards Helge journeyed to Iceland with his wife and
children, Hrod-wolf, Ingi-ald, and Ing-wen, whom Heah-mund Hell-skin
had to wife, for he came out with Helge. But when Helge gat sight of
Iceland, he enquired of Thunder or Thor where he should go to land; but
the oracle directed him to go to Ey-frith, and enjoined him earnestly
neither to go thence to the west nor to the east. Before the frith
opened Hrod-wolf, Helge's son, asked his father, if Thunder had told
him to go to the Dum Sea [the Arctic Ocean] for his winter quarters,
whether he would have done as he bade him or not? For the sailors
thought it was time to get off the sea, seeing that the summer was
far gone.

2. Helge came ashore beyond Risey, up in Swarfad-dale. He stayed
at Heah-mund-stead the first winter. They got such a hard winter
that it was within a little of all their live-stock that they had
with them dying. In the spring Helge walked up on to Sun-fell, and
saw that it was far blacker [less snow] to look on further up in a
frith, which they called Ey-frith, because of the islands that lay
out of the mouth of it. After that Helge carried all that he had
aboard his ship and put forth, but Heah-mund stayed behind. Helge
landed at Galt-hammer, where he put two swine ashore, a boar called
Solwe and a sow; they were found three winters later in Solwe-dale,
and they were then seventy head of swine. That winter Helge dwelt at
Bilds-water; but the next summer he spied out all the country side,
and took in settlement all Ey-frith between Mast-ness and Rowan-ness,
making a great fire at every river mouth by the sea, and so hallowing
to himself all the country side between the rivers.

3. But one winter later Helge flitted his household to Christ-ness,
and dwelt there till his death day. He was very mixed in his faith. He
put his trust in Christ, and named his homestead after him, but yet
he would pray to Thunder on sea voyages, and in hard stresses, and
in all those things that he thought were of most account to him. When
Helge was flitting Thorwen Hyrna gave birth to a child at the springs
of Ey-frith in Thorwen's-ey, and there Thor-berg Holm-sun was born.

After this Helge dealt out land to his sons and sons-in-law.

4. To his son Ingi-ald he gave land up from Upper Thwart-water, east of
Ey-frith-water, to Arne-hillock.  Ingi-ald dwelt at Upper Thwart-water,
and set up a great temple there. He had to wife Sal-gerd, the daughter
of Stan-wolf the Low of Risey, the son of Alwe Bairn-carle. Their
son was Ey-wolf, who had to wife As-rid, daughter of Wig-fus of Wors,
the son of Wicking Carl. Their sons were Wig-fus, and Slaughter-Glum,
and Thor-stan. The son of Slaughter-Glum was Wig-fus, the father of
Berg, the father of Stan-unn, the mother of Thor-stan the Wrongeous.

S: He had to wife Sal-gerd, daughter of Stan-wolf. Their son was
Ey-wolf, the father of Slaughter-Glum, and Stan-wolf, the father of
Thor-arin the Wicked, and of Arnor the Good, the Red-water-men's gode.

After that men took to dwell in the settlement of Helge at his rede
or counsel.

5. There was a man named Thor-stan Swarfad, the son of Red
Rugg of Neam-dale.  He had to wife Hild, the daughter of Thrain
Swart-goblin. Thor-stan came to Iceland, and took in settlement
Swarfad-dale by rede or counsel of Helge. His children were these:
Carle the Red, that dwelt at Carle's-river, and Gud-run, whom Haf-thor
the Wicking had to wife. Their children were Clove and Groa, whom
Gris Gledil had to wife.

6. There was a man named Atle Illing. He slew Haf-thor, and put Carle
the Red in irons. Then came Clove upon Atle unawares and slew him,
and took Carle out of irons. Clove had to wife Yngw-hild Red-cheek,
the daughter of As-gar or Os-gar Red-cloak, and the sister of An-laf
Sibyl-breaker, and Thor-laf the poet. He cut up of theirs a bag of
dye-weeds which they were gathering on his land, whereon Thor-laf
made this verse:--



    The farmer cut up my bag of dye weeds,
    And Olaf's strap and coat as well:
    So shall be, ...
    The farmer's skin hacked about.


            [See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 361 (corrected).]


Whence arose the History of the Men of Swarf-dale.

7. Carle was the name of a man that took in settlement all the strands
up from Ufse to Migande.

8. Heah-mund or Ha-mund Hell-skin got all Galman-strand and the land
between Swarfad-dale and Harrow-dale, and dwelt where Helge had first
dwelt, at the place that is now called Hamund-stead.

9. Hamund gave Erne his kinsman, who had taken in settlement
Erne-frith, further the land west of Reistar-river. Erne dwelt at
Erne-ness. Moreover Hamund sold to Thor-wald all the lands that lie
between Reistar-river and Harrow-dale-river. After him Thorwald-dale
is named, and there he dwelt.

10. Helge the Lean then gave Hamund the lands between Marksgill and
Squint-dale-water, and he dwelt at Aspen-hill. Thore was his son, who
also dwelt there. He was the father of Thor-wald Crook, the father of
Cetil [Cathal], the father of Einar, the father of Thor-stan Wrongeous.

Thor-wen was the name of the daughter of Erne of Erne's-ness, whom
As-gar Red-cloak had to wife, the son of Her-wolf that took Bride-dale
in settlement. As-gar was the brother of Bead-mod Gerpe, the son
of Grim-wolf of Agd. The mother of him and As-gar was Helm-gerd,
the sister of Brord and Bow. Narfe was yet another son of Erne of
Erne's-ness. He had to wife Wolf-heid, daughter of Ingi-ald, son
of Helge the Lean. After him Narfe's-reef is named. Their son was
As-brand, the father of Slate-Narfe.

11. S: Hamund Hell-skin, the son of king Heor, dealt out land to
Erne his kinsman, when he came out of the west, for he had taken in
settlement Erne-frith, and dwelt at Erne-ness. His daughter was Id-wen,
whom As-gar Red-cloak had to wife. The son of Erne was Narfe, after
whom Narfe's-reef is named. He had to wife Wolf-heid, the daughter of
Ingi-ald of Peak-fell. Their sons were these: As-brand, the father of
Cave-Narfe, and of Ey-wolf, the father of Thor-kell of Hay, and Helge,
the father of Grim of Calf-skin.

12. Galman [Irish] was the name of a man that took in settlement
Galman's-strand, between Thor-wald's-dale-river and Reistar-river. His
son was Thor-wald, father of Orm, the father of Thor-wald, the
father of Beorn, the father of Thord, the father of Thor-wen, the
mother of Dyr-finna, the mother of Thor-stan Smiths [C: A.D. 1200],
the son of Sceg.

13. Helge [Hamund] gave Thor-wald land between Reister-river and
Harrow-river; but before he had dwelt at Thor-wald-dale.

14. Gar-laf was the name of a man that took in settlement Harrow-river
up to Mirk-water. He was the son of Hrap, and dwelt at Old Hayes. His
son was Beorn the Wealthy, from whom the Aud-brink-men are come.

15. There was a man named Thord Slitter. He took in settlement all
Harrow-dale up from Mirk-water and down to Drong on the other side. His
son was Erne-wolf, that had to wife Yngw-hild All-sister. Their sons
were these: Thord and Thor-wend of Christ-ness, and Stan-grim of Cropp.

16. Thord Slitter gave part of his settlement to Thor-gar Scolm,
his kinsman. His son was Thor-elf the Strong, that dwelt at Mirk-water.

17. Thore Goblin-crusher was the name of a man that was born in Aumd in
Haleygo-land. He became a banished man before earl Hacon Gritgardsson,
and therefore he came to Iceland. He took in settlement all Oxen-dale,
and dwelt at Water-river or Mere-river. His son was Stan-rod the
Strong, who healed many men whom evil wights [demons and witches]
had wrought harm to.

18. Gar-hild was the name of a witch-woman that wrought evil. Men
with second-sight saw Stan-rod come upon her unawares; but she turned
herself into the shape of an ox-skin full of water. Stan-rod was an
iron-smith, and he had a great gad or bar of iron in his hand. Of
their meeting these verses were spoken:--



    The fork or bar hammers the swollen water-bag;
    The iron gad plays on the old wife's ribs at Shelty Eyre.


        [See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 328. The verses have been altered
        by a later editor.]


The daughter of Stan-rod was Thor-leot, whom Thor-ward of Christ-ness
had to wife.

19. Ead-wolf was the name of a man that came from Iadar to Iceland, and
took in settlement Harrow-dale down from Thwart-water to Bægis-water,
and dwelt at South Bægis-water. He had to wife Thor-hild, the daughter
of Helge the Lean. Their daughter was Yngw-hild, whom Thor-ord Helm
had to wife, the father of Arn-leot, the father of Hall-dor, the
father of Einar, the father of Ior-wen, the mother of Hall.

20. Ey-stan, the son of Red-wolf [S: Rand-wolf], the son of Oxen-Thore,
took land in settlement from Bægis-water to Crowling-lithe, and
dwelt at Lone or Wash. His son was Gund-stan, who had to wife Hlifa,
daughter of Hedin of Meola [isle in Norway]. Their children were
these: Hall-dora, whom Slaughter Glum had to wife, and Thor-grim,
and Grim Eyre-leg.

21. Ey-wind Cock was the name of a man of birth. He came to Iceland
late in the time of the settlement.  He owned a ship [as partner]
with Thor-grim, Hlifa's son.  He was the kinsman of the Ondott's
sons. They gave him land, and he dwelt at Cock-town, and was
called Town-cock,--the place that is now called Mere-boll. He had
to wife Thor-wen, the daughter of Oxen-Thore. His son was Snorre,
the Lithe-men's gode.


15. 1. Aun-dott or Ondott Crow, he who was spoken of before, became
a mighty man, and when Beorn his brother-in-law died, Grim the herse
said that all his wealth was forfeited to the king, because he was
an outlander or alien, and his sons were west over sea--Ey-wind
the East-man and Throwend the Far-sailer. But Ondott kept hold of
the heritage for Throwend and his sister's son. But when Throwend
heard of the death of his father, he sailed out of the Southreys,
the voyage that he got the name of the Far-sailer [Fast-sailer] by,
and took over his father's heritage, and then sailed to Iceland,
as shall be afterwards told.

2. The homestead of Ondott stood near the sea, and a short way from
Ingi-ald's-by; Grim dwelt a short way from Ingi-ald. And one night
as Ondott was cutting wood in the shaw for brewing a little before
Yule, Grim came upon him and slew him in the king's behalf, and four
more men with him. That same night Signy put on board a long-ship or
war-ship all Ondott's chattels, and set forth with her two little sons,
As-mund or Os-mund and As-grim or Os-grim, and all her house-carles,
to Sigh-wat her father; but her sons she sent to Hedin, her foster-son,
in Soken-dale, to be in hiding there, for she knew that Grim would
seek after them. And he came with two ships east of Sailor's Naze and
ransacked her ship, but could not find the boys. Stan-here was the
name of the man that took the boys to Hedin. Grim set forth to seek
them there; and he and his men came upon Erne-wolf, Hedin's son, in
the wood. He feigned himself mad, and made as if he had the falling
sickness, for he did not wish to say [where the boys were]. And
afterwards they lit upon Hedin's second son, whose name was Wolf,
keeping his father's sheep. He took half a hundred of silver from
Grim to say where the boys were; but he brought his father the money,
and told him all about it, and did not go back to Grim. Grim did not
dare to go and seek Hedin at home, for he suspected the faith of the
boy, so he went home. But the boys were in the underground house at
Hedin's till the harvest came, then they stole away, wishing to get
to Sigh-wat, their mother's father. But they went astray as to which
hand the sea lay. The frost was very hard, and they were shoeless,
but they got to a homestead. Said As-mund, 'Knowest this house,
brother?' 'Nay,' said As-grim; but as they got nearer, they saw the
bed-room that their father had had built, and knew it again. They
thought they were ill-come there, and turned to go to Ingi-ald the
Trusty's. It was then Yule-even. They hid themselves there. Gyda [the
house-wife] found them out first, and she called to Ingi-ald's mind the
friendship between him and Ondott, and begged him to receive them. They
were there that winter, but they did not go by their own names.

But the next summer Grim made a feast for Ead-wine the earl of king
Harold. And the night that he had been at the ale-brewing, the sons
of Ondott burnt him in his house. Then they took Ingi-ald's boat,
and rowed away to the islands that lay in the frith of Hwin, having
first told Gyda and Ingi-ald what they had done. Ingi-ald bade them
be off, and never come into his sight again. They pulled their boat
ashore, and went to the houses [on the island]. Then they heard
men talking inside the houses that night who had been on the cruise
with earl Ead-wine. They walked down to their boat as soon as they
had heard this, and rowed to the mainland. There they saw the earl's
smack lying afloat under awnings. They walked to the hall where they
were told the earl was sleeping; but his men were on board, and two
men were keeping watch and ward over him. As-mund gripped hold of
them both and held them, and As-grim walked into the hall, and put
the point of his spear to the earl's breast, and bade him pay him
his father's were-gild. Then the earl gave him up three gold rings
and a finely woven mantle; but As-grim gave him a name in return,
and called him Ead-wine Goat [= hare or craven]. Then Ondott's sons
ran down to their boat, and rowed away out to sea down the frith,
and into a current or race that there was in the frith, and then they
spread out on the sea the mantle; for they could see that the earl's
men were rowing after them, and that they could not get away. The
earl's men found the mantle, and thought that they must be drowned.

But the sons of Ondott went to Surn-dale, northward round Stim, to
Eiric Aul-fus, a thegen or baron. There dwelt also Hall-stan Stred,
another thegen or baron. They were keeping the Yule-drink [by turn],
and Eiric kept good cheer; but Hall-stan struck him with a horn
when they were at his house. Eiric now went home, but Hall-stan was
sitting still afterwards. As-grim came into his house alone, and gave
Hall-stan a great wound, and then sprang up and was off to the wood,
and Hall-stan's men after him. As-grim betook him to swimming a river
in the frost, but Hall-stan's house-carles wounded him sore shooting
at him. He got to an old woman's in the wood. She cut open a calf
and laid its guts on As-grim, so that they that came into the house
thought that it was his entrails that lay there, and that he was a
dead man. They turned home again, but the old woman healed him in
hiding in an underground house.

3. That summer As-mund went to Iceland, for he thought that his
brother As-gar was dead; and Helge the Lean gave him land to take in
settlement at Crowling-lithe.

There came out with him Bead-wolf of Hwin. His sons were Sceg and Thore
Cone-mull. Afterwards Bead-wolf had to wife Thor-borg Holm-sun. Their
daughter was Thor-gerd, whom As-mund, Ondott's son, had to wife.

4. Hall-stan died that same spring of his wound. Then Eiric Aulfus
gave As-grim a long ship with thirty benches told, and he took to
warring, and held that way of life some summers. King Harold sent
Thor-gar, Grim's sister's son, to fetch him As-grim's head and gave
him two war-ships. He could not light upon him. And then he set out
to Iceland being minded to slay As-mund, and came to Eyre and stayed
through the winter in Hwin-ware-dale. The summer after As-grim came
out to Eyre. He owned half a ship with Thore Cone-mull, and there were
four-and-twenty aboard of her. As-grim and Thore disagreed, and As-grim
bought the other's share for himself. Thore rode north with half the
crew, and came to Hwin-ware-dale, and told of As-grim's coming, and
then rode home. Half a month later As-grim rode forth from his ship,
and took guesting at Throwend the Far-sailer in Throwend-holt. He
bade him to stay the winter through with him, and told him that it
would not be without jeopardy that he would ride north by reason of
Thor-gar. Nevertheless As-grim set forth northward with twelve men,
and they had twelve pack-horses, and mails on them. The day they rode
over the Keel, As-grim bade his men ride in mail with their cowls
outside, and if they lit upon Thor-gar to tell him that it was Thore
Cone-mull that was on his way, but that As-grim was gone north. They
stayed two nights at Thor-gar's, for he thought it was Thore and his
men. He had thirty men there. He rode on the way with them; and when
he came home he laid him down to sleep, and dreamed that a woman came
to him and told him what guests had been staying with him. Then he and
his men rode after them; but As-grim waited for him at the settlement
of We-kell's Barrow, and thither came As-mund his brother to meet him
with forty men, and he made peace between Thor-gar and As-grim. A
few winters later As-grim went abroad, and took to wife Gar-rid,
the daughter of Eiric Aul-fus. Their son was Ellida-Grim. They came
to Iceland afterwards, and Helge the Lean gave As-grim a settlement
in Crowling-lithe, and the two brothers owned all the lithe; and it
was called after them Crowling-lithe, because they were the sons of
Ondott Crow. As-mund dwelt at South Glas-water and As-grim at North
Glas-water. As-grim's son was Ellida-Grim, the father of As-grim,
the father of Sig-fus, the father of Thor-gerd, the mother of Grim,
the father of Swerting.

6. Helge the Lean gave Ha-mund, his son-in-law, land between Mark-gill
and Squint-dale-river, and he dwelt at South Aspen-hill. His son
was Thore, who dwelt there. He had to wife Thor-dis, Cathal's
daughter. Their son was Thor-arin that dwelt at North Aspen-hill,
and Thor-wald Crook of Ground, but Thor-grim of Madder-field was not
the son of Thor-dis, and Wig-dis was their daughter.

7. Helge gave Thora, his daughter, in wedlock to Gun-here, the son
of Wolf-leot that brought the constitution out hither, and he gave
Gun-here also land up from Squint-dale-river to Neck. Gun-here dwelt
at Deep-dale. Their children were these: Thor-stan and Cetil, and
Stan-wolf or Stan-mod, and Yngw-hild, and Thor-laug.

8. Helge gave Helga, his daughter, to Ead-wine Rotin, the son of
Thor-wolf Butter, the son of Thor-stan Scrofe, the son of Grim Camban,
and land up from Neck to Wilding-dale. He dwelt at Sowerby. Their
children were these: Einar, father of Ey-wolf, father of Gudmund the
Mighty, and Wig-dis, mother of Hall the White, the father of Orm,
the father of Hall, the father of Thor-gar.

9. Hamund Hell-skin took to wife Helga, daughter of Helge, after
the death of Ing-wen her sister, and their daughter was Yngw-hild
All-men's sister, whom Erne-wolf had to wife.

10. Helge gave his son Hrod-wolf all the lands from the east of
Ey-frith from Erne's-hillock up, and he dwelt at Peak-fell, and set
up a great temple there. He had to wife Thor-orna, the daughter of
Thrond Slim-leg. Their children were these: Haf-lide the Open-handed,
and Wal-theow, Wid-here, and Grane, Bead-were, and Ingi-ald, Ey-wind,
Gud-laug, whom Thor-kell the Black had to wife. Wal-theow was the
father of Helge, the father of Thore, the father of Arn-thor, the
father of Thor-rid.

11. Helge gave his daughter Hlifa to Thor-gar, the son of Thord Bialca,
and land west from Thwart-water to Ward-geow or Ward-rift. They dwelt
at Fish-beck. Their children were these: Thord and Helga.

12. Scage, Scofte's son, was the name of a nobleman in More. He was
at feud with Ey-stan Glumra, and therefore came to Iceland. He took
in settlement by counsel of Helge the northern [eastern] strand of
Ey-frith, west from Ward-rift to Tinder-dale-water, and dwelt at
Mast-wick. His son was Thor-beorn, the father of Hedin the Mild, who
built Swal-bard [Cold-beard] sixteen winters before Christendom. He
had to wife Regin-hild, the daughter of Ey-wolf Walgerdsson.


16. 1. Thore Snip was the name of a man, the son of Cetil Brimil or
Surf-seal, the son of Erne-wolf, the son of Beorn-wolf, the son of
Grim Hairy-cheek. Cetil Brimil had to wife Ior-wen, the daughter of
Thorg-ny the Lawman of Swee-ric [Sweden]. Cetil Brimil was a great
wicking. He went to Shet-land with Turf-Einar. Geat was the name of
his shipmate. But as he was getting ready to go to Iceland, and as
they were putting out to sea, wickings came upon them wishing to rob
them; but Geat struck their forecastle man dead with the tiller,
and with that the wickings made off. Ever after Geat was called
Tiller-geat. He and Thore sailed to Iceland, and came in their ship
to the mouth Quaking-fleet. Thori took in settlement Cold-cheek
between Sceg-berg and Light-water-pass. He was not pleased with,
or could not rest in this place, and went away, and then he quoth:--


    Cold-cheek, there thou liest; I cannot find any pleasure in thee.
    But, Tiller-Gaut, let us hence hale away.


        [See Corpus Poet. Bor. i. 361 (corrected).]


Then he took in settlement all Tinder-dale to Un-dale, and dwelt at
Lund [Grove]. He sacrificed to the grove. Worm Mail-back was the
son of Snip, the father of Hlenne the Old and Thor-kell the Black
of Hledra-garth [Tent-garth], who had to wife Gud-laug, Hrod-wolf's
daughter. Their son was Ongul the Black, and Raven, the father of
Thord of Stock-lathe, and of Gud-rid, whom Thor-gar, gode or priest
of Light-water, had to wife.

2. Thengil the Far-sailer went from Halogo-land to Iceland. He took
land in settlement, at the rede of Helge, west from Tinder-water
to Pine-wick, and dwelt at Head. His sons were these: Wer-mund, the
father of As-wolf of Head, and Hall-stan, who quoth these verses as
he sailed home from sea and heard news of the death of his father:--



    The headlands droop for Thengil's death,
    The hill-sides laugh to welcome Hallstan [the heir].


        [See Corpus Poet. Bor. i. 361.]


3. Thor-mod was the name of a man that took in settlement Pine-wick
and Whale-lair, and all the strand west to Thor-gar's-frith. His son
was Snert, whence the Snertlings are come from.

4. Thor-gar was the name of a man that took in settlement
Thor-gar's-frith and Whale-mere-frith.

5. Lodin Angle was the name of a man that was born in Angley in
Haloga-land. He came to Iceland because of the oppression of earl
Hacon Grit-gardsson. King Sig-here had dwelt in Angley at Steig, and
there is Signy's well and Hag-bard's-holm. Lodin Angle died at sea; but
Ey-wind his son took in settlement Flatey-dale up to the Gund-stones,
and sacrificed there. There lies Un-deal between his settlement and
Thore Snip's. As-beorn Drop-beam was the son of Ey-wind, the father
of Fin-bow the Strong.


17. 1. Bard, the son of Beorn of Heyang, came in his ship to the
mouth of Quaking-fleet, and took in settlement all Bard-dale up from
Calf-borg-water and Ey-dale-water, and dwelt at Grove-brink for some
while. Now he marked that the land winds were warmer than the sea
winds, and thereby thought that there must be a better choice of land
to the south of the Heath. He sent his sons south in Goe [10 Feb.-10
Mar.]. They found scouring rush and other growth. But the second
spring after Bard put a sled to every living thing that could walk,
and made each drag his own fodder, and all his chattels. He went by
a path that was afterwards called Bard's-gate over the pass of Good
Hope, and then took in settlement Fleet-wharf, and dwelt at Peaks. He
was called Bard o' the Peak. He had many children.

2. His son was Sig-mund, the father of Thor-stan, that had to wife Asa,
the daughter of Hrod-wolf Red-beard. Their daughter was Thor-wen,
whom Thor-kell Laf had to wife, and their son was Thor-gar-gode
of Light-water.

Another son of Bard's was Thor-stan, father of Thore, that fought at
Fitia with king Hacon, and cut a slit in an ox-hide, and had that for
armour, wherefore he was called Leather-neck. He had to wife Fior-leva
[or Frey-leva], daughter of Ey-wind. Their sons were these: Ha-ward of
Fell's-mull, and Here-wolf of Midge-mere, and Cetil of House-wick, and
We-mund Quiver that had to wife Hall-dora, the daughter of Thor-kell
the Black, and As-kell and Neck that dwelt at Helga-stead.

3. Cempe Grim, or Champion-Grim, came to Iceland from the Southreys,
and tossed about on the sea all the summer, and ran his ship ashore
at the mouth of Quaking-fleet. He took in settlement Cold-cheek for
the second time, and afterwards sold [parts of] it to divers men. His
daughter was Arn-borg, whom As-wolf of Head had to wife.

4. Thor-fin Moon, the son of As-kell-Tiorwe.  He took land in
settlement from under Ey-dale-water to Land-mete, and some part beyond
Light-water-pass, and dwelt at Ax-water.


18. 1. S: Thore, the son of Grim Gray-cloak's-mule of Rogaland. He
took in settlement Light-water-pass. His son was Thor-kell Laf the
Tall, the father of Thor-gar-gode. Thor-gar first had to wife Gud-rid,
the daughter of Thor-kell the Black. Their sons were Thor-kell Hake
and Haus-Coll, Tiorwe and Coil-Grim, Thor-stan and Thor-ward, and a
daughter Sig-rid. Afterwards he had to wife Sal-gerd [S: Alf-gerd],
the daughter of Arn-gar the Eastron. He had to wife also [third wife]
Thor-katla, the daughter of Coll-a-Dale. His sons by these wives were
Thor-grim, Oht-here, Thor-gils. These were bastards: Thor-grim and
Fin the Dream-teller. His mother was Lec-ny, a stranger woman.

2. Hedin and Haus-Coll, the sons of Thor-stan Goblin, came to Iceland,
and took land in settlement inward of Tongue-heath. Hedin dwelt at
Hedin-head, and had to wife Gud-run. Their sons were Arn-mod, whom
Ketil, Fior-leva's son, had to wife; but Gud-run was their daughter,
whom Hrod-wolf of Peak-fell had to wife.

Haus-Coll took all the lands east of Lax-water, and dwelt at
Pass-wick. After him Haus-Coll's-mere is called, because he was drowned
there. In their settlement is House-wick, where Gard-here had a winter
abode. The son of Haus-Coll was Hrod-wald, who had to wife Egi-leva,
daughter of Hrod-wolf, son of Helge the Lean.

3. West-mere and Wolf, sworn brethren, came in one ship to Iceland,
and took in settlement all Reek-dale, west of Lax-water up to
West-mere-water. West-mere had to wife Gud-laug. Wolf dwelt below
Scrat-fell. [He had to wife ... ] His son was Gar-wolf, that had
to wife Wig-dis, the daughter of Conall, after Thor-grim. Their son
was Hall.


19. 1. Thor-stan Head was the name of a man that was a herse
in Hausda-land. His sons were these: Ey-wind and Cetil the
Haur-dish. Ey-wind went to Iceland after his father's death; but
Cetil asked him to take land in settlement for both of them, in case
he should get in his head to come later. Cetil beached his ship in
House-wick, and took in settlement Reek-dale up from West-mere-water,
and dwelt at Helge-stead, and there is his barrow. His son was
As-kell, that got his death-wound at Ey-frith-water over against
Cropp, when Stan-grim was about revenging the blow with the singed
sheep's-head. As-kell had to wife the daughter of Greniad. Their son
was Slaughter-Scuta. Fior-leva was the name of the daughter of Ey-wind,
whom Thore Leather-neck had to wife.

2. Night-farer, that had come out with Gard-here, had owned Reek-dale
before, and had marked the trees. But Ey-wind drove him away, and
let him have Natt-fare-wick.

3. Cetil, his [Eywind's] brother, dwelt at Einar-stead. His son was
Conall, that had to wife Ord-ny, Einar's daughter, the sister of
Ey-wolf Walgerdsson; their son was Einar. Thord was another son of
Conall. He was the father of Sock of Broad-mire, the father of Conall.

4. [Double text.] Cetil came out to Iceland at the message of
Ey-wind. He dwelt at Einar-stead. His son was Conall, and [also]
Thor-stan, the son of Einar, that dwelt there afterwards. Ey-wind's
son was As-kell or Cetil gode, that had to wife the daughter of
Greniad. Their sons were Thor-stan and Slaughter-Scuta. Ey-wind's
daughter was Fior-leva. Conall had to wife Ord-ny, the daughter of
Einar, sister of Ey-wolf Walgerdsson. Their children were these:
Einar, that had six sons, and a daughter Thor-ney, whom Stan-wolf,
Mar's son, had to wife, and another Ey-dis, whom Thor-stan the priest
had to wife out of As-beorn-wick. Thord, Conall's son, was the father
of Socka of Broad-mire, the father of Conall. The daughter of Conall
was Wig-dis, whom Thor-grim, the son of Thor-beorn-shaw, had to wife,
and their son was Thor-laf, Gar-wolf's step-son.

5. Greniad was the name of a man, the son of Hrapp, the brother of
Gar-laf. He took in settlement Thawing-dale and Cran-heath, below
Thor-gerd's-fell and Lax-water-dale. He dwelt at Greniad-stead. He
had to wife Thor-gerd, the daughter of Helge-steed. Their son was
Thor-gills Wa-mull, the father of Ean-wend.


20. 1. Bead-wolf was the name of a man, the son of Grim [Orm],
Grim-wolf's son of Agd, the brother of Bead-mod. He had to wife
Thor-unn, the daughter of Thor-wolf the historian. Their son was
Sceg. They [all] went forth to Iceland, and ran their ship ashore on
Tior-ness, and stayed at Bead-wolf's-cote the first winter. He took in
settlement all Tior-ness between Tongue-water and the Mouth. Afterwards
Bead-wolf took to wife Thor-borg Haulm-sun, the daughter of Helge the
Lean. Their daughter was Thor-gerd, whom As-mund, Ondott's son, had
to wife. Their son was Thor-laf, the father of Thu-rid, whom Leot o'
Field had to wife.

2. Sceg, Bead-wolf's son, took in settlement Well-wharf up to
Well-ness, and dwelt at Mickle-garth. He had to wife Helga, the
daughter of Thor-gar of Fish-beck. Their son was Thore, a great
traveller. He had a cog or merchantman built at Frith of Sogn,
which bishop Sig-rod the Mighty, who was with king Anlaf Tryggwason,
hallowed. Moreover he baptized Thore. Out of this cog the door-posts
were made which stood before the doors at Mickle-garth long afterwards,
and they could foretell the weather very well until the days of
bishop Brand. Worm was the son of Thore, whom Grette, As-mund's son,
murdered. Upon Thore Grette made these verses:--



    I shall not ride to meet the great companies of Thore:
    My way leads to Lund. I mean to save my head.


            [See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 114.]


An was the name of the son of Thore. [He was] the father of Erne.

3. Mane [Moon] was the name of a man. He was born in Omd in
Haloga-land, and came out to Iceland, and ran ashore on Tior-ness,
and dwelt at Moon-river some winters. Then Bead-wolf drove him away
thence, and then he took in settlement land below Calf-borg-river,
between Fleet and Red-scrape or slip, and dwelt at Moon-fell. His
son was Cetil, that had to wife Weoh-dis, daughter of Thor-brand,
that bought Red-slip-land of Moon. His daughter was Dalla, the sister
of Thor-gar, Galti's son. Thor-wald Sholtoson had her to wife.

4. Leot the Unwashed was the name of a man that took in settlement
Well-wharf up from Well-ness. His son was Gris, the father of Galte
[Boar] of Ridge. He was a wise man and a great fighter.

5. Ean-wend took in settlement all Well-wharf up [in] from Well-ness,
and dwelt at Ridge. He was the son of Blaeng, Soti's son, the brother
of Balci of Red-frith. The daughter of Ean-wend was Thor-borg, whom
Hall-gils, Thor-brand's son of Red-slip, had to wife.


21. 1. Thor-stan, the son of Sig-mund, Bard o' Peak's son, dwelt
first at Midge-mere. His son was Thor-grim, the father of Arnor of
Reek-lithe, that had to wife Thor-katla, the daughter of Bead-were,
the son of Hrod-wolf of Peak-fell. Their son was Bead-were.

2. Thor-kell the Tall came young to Iceland, and first dwelt
at Green-mere that came out of Midge-mere. His son was Sig-mund,
that had to wife Wig-dis, the daughter of Thore of Aspen-hill. Glum
slew him in the field which was called Never-fail. The daughter of
Thor-kell was Arn-dis, whom Wig-fus, the brother of Slaughter Glum,
had to wife. Thor-kell begat a son in his old age that was called Day,
the father of Thor-arin, that had to wife Yngw-hild, the daughter of
Hall o' Side, after Ey-wolf the Halt had had her to wife.

3. Gare was the name of a man that first dwelt south of Midge-mere
at Gare-stead. His son was Glum the poet, and [also] Thor-kell. Gare
and his sons fought against Thor-gar Hewn-cheek, and slew his son
Thor-stan; and for this manslaughter they were driven north out
of that country. Gare sat still in the winter at Gare-stead hard
by Cub-mere. Afterwards they went to Broad-frith, and dwelt at
Gare's-dale in Crook-frith. Glum took to wife Ing-wen, daughter of
Thor-wolf, We-laf's son. Their children were these: Thord, that had
to wife God-run, Os-wif's daughter, and Thor-gard, whom Thor-arin,
the son of Ingi-ald, the son of Helga Stan-here, had to wife.


22. 1. Earl Turf-einar begat a daughter in his youth, whose name was
Thor-dis. Earl Regin-wald brought her up, and gave her in wedlock to
Thor-gar Cloven-foot. Their son was Einar. He went to the Orkneys to
see his kinsmen, but they would not receive him as their kinsman. Then
Einar bought a ship and sailed to Iceland with two brethren, Westman
[Irishman] and We-mund. They sailed north about the land, and went into
the friths round Plain. They planted an ax in Reister-peak, and called
it Ax-frith. They set up an erne or eagle towards the west, and called
it Erne-tump; and in the third place they set up a cross, and called
it Cross-ridge, and then they hallowed to themselves all Ax-frith.

Einar's children were these: Ey-wolf, whom Galte, the son of Gris,
slew; and Leot, the mother of Hrode the Sharp, who avenged Ey-wolf
and slew Galte. The sons of Glire Hall, Brand and Berg, were the sons
of Leot's daughter. They fell in Bead-were's-dale.

2. Reist was the name of a man, the son of Bearney-Cetil and Hild,
the sister of Cetil Thistle, the father of Arn-stan gode. He took land
in settlement between Reist-peak and Red-peak, and dwelt at Lear-haven.

3. Arn-gar or Erne-gar was the name of a man that took all the
plain between Ha-were's-wash and Swegenungs-wick. His children were
these: Thor-gils and Ord or Orde, and Thor-rid, whom Stan-wolf of
Steer-water-dale had to wife.

4. Ord was wont to sit by the fireside [ingle side] in his youth, and
to get up late, and was called Coal-biter. Arn-gar and Thor-gils went
forth from their home in a snowstorm to walk and seek their sheep,
and never came back again. A white bear slew them both, Arn-gar and
Thor-gils. Ord went forth to seek them, and the bear was by them, and
sucking their blood. Ord slew the bear, and ate it all, saying, that
he avenged his father when he slew the bear, and his brother when he
ate it. After this Ord was wicked and ill to deal with, and was so very
skin-strong [lycanthropic] that he walked from home out of Lava-haven
in the evening, and the morning after came to Steer-water-dale to
the help of his sister, when the Steer-dale-men were about to stone
her for witchcraft, and because she was possessed with a fiend.

5. Swainung or Swegenung and Coll took in settlement the bays that
are called after them--Swegenungs-wick and Coll-wick.

6. Cetil Thistle was the name of a man, wicked and ill to deal
with. He took in settlement Thistle's-frith, between Hounds-ness
and Sheep-ness. His son was Sig-mund, that took in settlement at
Snow-fells-ness. He was the father of Bath-brink Einar.

Now are written the Settlements in Northmen Quarter.











LIB. IV.

Nú hefer upp Land-naóm í Austfirðinga-fiórðunge: ok segja menn svá,
at þesse fiórðongr hafe fyrst albygðr veret á Íslande [687]5

1. 1. Gunnolfr Croppa hét maðr, son Þóres Hauk­nefs, hersis. Hann
nam Gunnolfs-vík, ok Gunnolfs-fell, ok Langa-nes allt fyr útan
Helkundo-heiðe; ok bió í Fagra-vík: hans son vas Skúle Herkja, faðer
Geirlaugar [688].

2. Finne hét maðr, es nam Finna-fiaorð, ok Við-fiaorð [689]: hans
son10 vas Þórarenn, faðer Sigurðar, faoðor Gliro-Halla.

3. Hroðgeirr enn Hvíte, Hrapps son, nam Sand-vík fyr norðan Digra-nes,
allt til Viðfiarðar, ok bió á Skeggja-staoðom: hans dótter vas
Ingebiaorg, es átte Þórsteinn enn Hvíte.

4. Alrekr vas bróðer Hroðgeirs, es út kom með hónom; hann15 vas faðer
Liótolfs Goða í Svarfaðar-dale.


2. 1. Eyvinðr Vápne, ok Refr enn Rauðe, syner Þórsteins Þiocko-beins,
fóro til Íslannz or Þróndheime af [[239: iv. 1.]]  Strind; þvi at þeir
urðo ósátter við Harald konung; ok hafðe sítt skip hvárr þeirra. Refr
varð aftr-reka; ok lét Haraldr konungr drepa hann; en Eyvindr kom
í Vápna-fiaorð, ok nam fiaorðenn allan fyr vestan Vestra-dals-aó;
ok bió í Crossa-vík-enne-iðre. Hans son vas Þórbiaorn.5

2. Steinbiaorn Cortr hét son Refs ens Rauða. Hann fór til Íslannz,
ok kom í Vápna-fiaorð. Eyvindr, faoðor-bróðer hans, gaf hónom land
allt miðle Vápna-fiarðar-ár ok Vestra-dals-ár: hann bió at Hofe. Hans
syner vóro þeir Þórmóðr Sticku-blígr [690], es bió í Sunnu-dale: annarr
Refr á Refs-staoðom: Þriðe Egill á Egils-staoðom,10 faðer Þórarens. ok
Þrastar, ok Hallbiarnar; ok Hallfríðar, es átte Þórkell Geitis son.

3. Hroaldr Biolan [691] vas fóst-bróðer Eyvindar Vápna. Hann nam land
fyr vestan Vestra-dals-aó, dalenn halfan, ok Selár-dal allan út (til)
Digra-ness. Hann bió á Torva-staoðom. Hans son vas Isroeðr,15 faðer
Gunnildar, es átte Odde, son Asolfs í Haofða [692].


3. 1. Olver enn Hvíte hét maðr, Ósvallz [693] son, OExna-Þóris sonar;
hann vas lendr maðr, ok bió í Almdaolom. Hann varð ósáttr við Hákon
iarl Griótgarz son: hann fór á Yrjar, ok dó þar. En Þórsteinn enn
Hvíte, son hans, fór til Íslannz, ok20 kom skipe síno í Vápna-fiaorð
efter land-naóm. Hann keypte land at Vápna, ok bió á Tofta-velle
nockora vettr fyr útan Sireks-staðe [694], [[240: iv. 2.]] áðr hann
komsk at Hofs-laondom, með því móte, at hann heimte leigo-fé sítt at
Steinbirne Cort; en hann hafðe ecki til at gialda nema landet. Þar
bió Þórsteinn sex tigo [695] vetra síðan; ok vas vitr maðr ok
góðr [696]. Hann átte Ingibiaorgo, dóttor Hroðgeirs ens Hvíta:
þeirra baorn vóro þau, Þórgils, ok Þórðr, Onundr, ok Þór­biaorg,5
ok Þóra. Þórgils átte Ásvoro, dóttor Þóriss, Graut-Atla sonar:
þeirra son vas Brodd-Helge, es átte fyrr Haollo, Lýtings dóttor,
Arnbiarnar sonar: þeirra son vas Víga-Biarne; hann átte Rannveigo,
dóttor Eiriks í Goðdaolom: þeirra son vas Skegg-Brodde; en dótter
Yngvildr, es átte Þórsteinn Hallz son. Skegg-Brodde10 átte Goðrúno,
dóttor Þórarens Sælings [697] ok Halldóro Einars dóttor: þeirra baorn,
Þórer, ok Biarne Hús-langr. Þórer átte Steinunne, dóttor Þórgríms ens
Háva: þeirra dótter vas Goðrún, es átte Flose, son Kolbeins: þeirra
son Biarne [698], faðer Biarna, es átte Haollo, Iorundar dóttor.15

2. Þórsteinn Torfe ok Lýtingr broeðr [699] fóro til Íslannz. Lýtingr
nam Vápna-fiarðar-straond alla ena eystre, Baoðvars-dal ok Fagra-dal,
ok bió í Crossa-vík; ok lifðe her faó vettr.--Frá hónom ero
Vápn-firðingar komner. Geiter vas son Lýtings, faðer Þórkels.

3. Þórfiðr hét maðr, es fyrst bió á Skeggja-staoðom at ráðe20
Þórðar Halma. Hans son vas Þórsteinn Fagre, es vá Einar, son [[241:
iv. 2.]] Þóris Graut-Atla sonar [700]; ok broeðr hans tveir, Þórkell
[701] ok Heðinn, es vaógo Þórgils faoðor Brodd-Helga.

4. Þórsteinn Torfe nam Hlíð alla, útan frá Ós-fiaollom ok upp til
Hvann-ár [702], ok bió á Fors-velle. Hans son vas Þórvaldr, faðer
Þórgeirs, faoðor Hallgeirs, faoðor Hrapps á Fors-velle.5

5. Hákon hét maðr, es nam Iaokuls-dal allan fyr vestan Iaokuls-aó,
ok fyr ofan Teigar-aó, ok bió á Hákonar-staoðom. Hans dótter
vas Þórbiaorg, es aótto syner Brynjolfs ens Gamla, Gunnbiaorn,
ok Hallgrímr. Teigr lá ónumenn miðle Þórsteins Torfa ok Hákonar;
þann laogðo þeir til hofs.--Sá heiter nú Hofs-teigr.10

6. Skioldolfr, Vémundar son, bróðer Berðlo-Kára, nam Iaokuls-dal
fyr austan Iaokuls-aó, ok upp frá Cnefils-dals-aó; ok bió á
Skioldolfs-staoðom. Hans baorn vóro (þau) Þórsteinn, es átte Fast-nýjo,
Brynjolfs dóttor ens Gamla; ok Sigríðr, es átte Ozurr Brynjolfs son;
þeirra son Berse, es Bersa-staðer ero við kender.15

7. Þórðr Þvare, son Þórolfs Halma, bróðor Helga Bun-hauss; hann
nam Tungo-laond aoll miðle Iaokuls-ár ok Lagar-fliótz, fyr austan
Rang-aó. Hans son vas Þórolfr Halme, es átte Goðríðe Brynjolfs dóttor
ens Gamla. Þeirra son vas Þórðr Þvare, faðer Þóroddz [703], faoðor
Branz [f. Steinunnar, m. Rannveigar, m. Sæhildar20 es Gizorr Hallz
son átte].

8. Ozurr Slaga-collr nam land á miðle Orms-ár ok Rang-ár. [[243:
iv. 2.]] Hann átte Goðnýjo, Brynjolfs dóttor: þeirra son vas Ásmundr,
faðer Marðar.


4. 1. Ketill ok Graut-Atle, syner Þóris Þiðranda, fóro or Vera-dale
til Íslannz, ok naómo land í Fliótz-dale, fyrr an Bryniolfr kveme
út, Lagar-fliótz-strander báðar: Ketill fyr5 vestan Fliótz-aó, miðle
Hengi-fors-ár ok Orms-ár.

2. Ketill fór útan ok vas með Veþorme, syne Vémundar ens Gamla: þá
keypte hann at Veþorme Arneiðe, dóttor Ásbiarnar iarls Skerja-Blesa,
es Holmfastr, son Veþorms, hafðe her-teket, þá es þeir Grímr systor-son
Veþorms, draópo Ásbiaorn iarl í Suðr-eyjom.10 Ketill Þrymr keypte
Arneiðe tveimr [704] hlutom dýrra an Veþormr mat hána í fyrsto
[705]. En áðr þau Ketill fóro til Íslannz, fann Arneiðr silfr mikit
under viðar-rótom, ok leynde Ketil til þess es hann feck hennar. Þau
fóro út, ok bioggo á Arneiðar-staoðom. Þeirra son vas Þiðrande,
faðer Ketils í Niarð-vík.15

[S: En es kaupet var orðet, þá goerðe Ketill brúðkaup til
Arneiðar. Efter þat fann hon graf-silfr mikit under viðar-rótum. Þá
bauð Ketill at flytja hána til frænda sínna; en hón kaus þá hónom at
fylgja. Þau fóro, etc.]

3. Graut-Atle nam ena eystre straond Lagar-fliótz, allt á miðle20
Gilj-ár ok Valla-ness, fyr vestan Oxa-loek [706]. Hans syner vóro
þeir Þórbiaorn, ok Þórer, es átte Ásvaoro Brynjolfs dóttor.


[[244: iv. 3.]]

5. 1. Þórgeirr Vestars son hét maðr gaofogr [707]: hann átte þriá
sono, ok vas einn Brynjolfr enn Gamle: annarr Ævarr enn Gamle: þriðe
Herjolfr. Þeir fóro aller til Íslannz; ok á síno skipe hverr þeirra.

2. Brynjolfr kom skipe síno í Eske-fiaorð; ok nam land fyr ofan5
fiall: Fliótz-dal allan fyr ofan Hengifors-aó [708], fyr vestan; en
fyr ofan Gils-aó fyr austan; ok Skriðo-dal allan; ok svá Vaollona
út til Eyvindar-ár; ok tók miket af land-náme Una Garðars sonar;
ok bygðe þar frændom ok maógom sínom. Hann átte tio baorn. En síðan
feck hann Helgo, es átt hafðe Herjolfr, bróðer hans; ok10 aótto
þau þriú baorn. Þeirra son vas Ozorr, faðer Bersa [f. Holmsteins
[709]], faoðor Úroekjo, faoðor Holmsteins [f. Helgo, m. Holmsteins,
f. Hallgerðar, m. Þorbiargar, er átte Loptr Byscops son].

3. Ævarr hét maðr enn Gamle, bróðer Brynjolfs; (hann) kom út
í Reyðar-firðe; ok fór upp um fiall. Hónom gaf Brynjolfr [710]
Skriðo-dal15 allan fyr ofan Gils-aó. Hann bió á Arnallz-staoðom:
hann átte tvá sono ok doetr þriár. [711]

4. Ísroeðr [712] hét maðr, es feck Ásvarar, Herjolfs dóttor,
bróðor-dóttor Brynjolfs ok stiúp-dóttor: henne fylgðo heiman aoll laond
miðle Gils-ár ok Eyvindar-ár. Þau bioggo á Ketils-staoðom:20 þeirra
son vas Þórvaldr Holbarke, faðer Þórbergs, faoðor Haf-Liótz, [[245:
iv. 4.]] faoðor Þórhaddz [713] Skálar. Dótter Holbarka vas Þórunn,
es átte Þórbiaorn Graut-Atla son: aonnor Ástríðr, móðer Ásbiarnar
Loðin-haofða, faoðor Þórarens í Seyðar-firðe, faoðor Ásbiarnar,
faoðor Kolskeggs ens Fróða ok Ingileifar, móðor Hallz, faoðor Finnz
Laogsaogo mannz.5


6. 1. Hrafnkell hét maðr, Hrafns son: hann kom út síð
lannáma-tíðar. Hann vas enn fyrsta vetr í Breið-dale; en um váret
fór hann upp um fiall.

2. Hann áðe í Skriðo-dale, ok sofnaðe. Þá dreymðe hann, at maðr kom
at hónom, ok bað hann upp standa, ok fara braut sem skiótazt.10 Hann
vaknaðe [714], ok fór á braut; en es hann vas skamt komenn, þá hlióp
ofan fiallet allt, ok varð under gaoltr ok griðungr es hann átte.

3. Síðan nam hann Hrafnkels-dal, ok bió á Steinroeðar-staoðom. Hans
son vas Ásbiaorn, faðer Helga; ok Þórer, faðer Hrafnkels15 Goða,
faoðor Sveinbiarnar.


7. 1. Une enn Danske [715] eða enn Úborne, son Garðars es fann
Ísland, fór til Íslannz með ráðe Haralldz konongs ens Hárfagra;
ok ætlaðe at leggja under sik landet; en síðan hafðe konongr heiteð
at goera hann iarl sínn. Une tók land20 þar sem nú heiter Una-óss,
ok húsaðe þar. Hann nam ser land til eignar fyr sunnan Lagar-fliót,
allt hérað til Una-loekjar.

[[247: iv. 4.]]

2. En es lannz-menn visso ætlan hans, tóko þeir at ýfask við hann,
ok vildo eige selja hónom kvik-fé eða vister: ok mátte hann eige þar
við halldask. Une fór braut, ok kom í Alfta-fiaorð-enn-syðra; hann
náðe þar eige at stað-festask: þá fór hann austan með tolfta mann;
ok kom at vetre til Leiðolfs kappa í Skóga-hverfe;5 hann tók við
þeim. Une elskaðe Þórunne dóttor Leiðolfs; ok vas hon með barne um
váret. Þá vilde Une hlaupask braut með menn sína; en Leiðolfr reið
efter hónom; ok fundosk þeir hiá Flanga-staoðom, ok baorðosk; þvi at
Une vilde eige aftr fara með Leiðolfe. Þar féllo nockorer menn af Una,
en aftr fór hann10 nauðegr, þvi at Leiðolfr vilde at hann fenge kono
[716], ok staðfestesk þar, ok toeke arf efter hann. Nockoro síðarr
hlióp Une í braut þá es Leiðolfr vas eige heima, en Leiðolfr reið
efter hónom þá es hann visse; ok fundosk þeir hiá Kalfa-graofom. Hann
vas þá svá reiðr, at hann drap Una ok faoro-nauta hans alla.15

Son Una ok Þórunnar vas Hróarr Tungo-Goðe; hann tók arf Leiðolfs
allan [717], ok vas enn meste hermaðr. Hann átte Arngunne [718]
dóttor Hámundar [719] systor Gunnars frá Hlíðar-enda: þeirra son vas
Hámundr enn Halte, enn meste víga-maðr. Tiorve enn Háðsame ok Gunnarr
vóro systor-syner Hróars.20

3. Tiorve bað Ástríðar Manviz-brecku, Moðolfs dóttor; en [[248:
iv. 4.]] broeðr hennar, Ketill ok Hrólfr, synjoðo hónom kono; en þeir
gaófo hána Þóre Ketils syne. Því [720] dró Tiorve líkneske þeirra
á camars-vegg. En hvert kveld es þeir Hróarr gengo til camars, þá
hrækðe hann í andlit líkneske Þóress, en kyste á hennar líkneske,
áðr Hróarr skóf af. Efter þat skar Hróarr þau á knífs-hefte [721]
síno,5 ok kvað þetta:


    Ver haofom þat sem Þóre ...


Her af urðo víg Hróars ok systor-sona hans [722].

[M*: Heraf goerðez fiándskapr þeirra meire, ok vógo þeir syner Moðolfs
Ketill ok Hrólfr, ok Brandr frá Gnúpom, faoðor-bróðer10 þeirra, ok
Þórer Ketils son, es átte Ástríðe: Hróar Goða, ok Tiorva, ok Kolbein.]


8. 1. Þórkell Full-spakr hét maðr, es nam Niarð-vík alla, ok bió
þar. Hans dótter vas Þióðhildr [723], es átte Ævarr enn Gamle, ok vas
þeirra dótter Yngvilldr, móðer15 Ketils í Niarð-vík, Þiðranda sonar.

2. Vetr-liðe hét maðr, son Árinbiarnar [724], Óláfs sonar Lang-hals,
bróðer þeirra Lýtings [725], ok Þórsteins Torfa, ok Þórbiarnar í
Arnar-holte. Óláfr Langhals vas son Biarnar Reyðar-síðo. Vetr-liðe
nam Borgar-fiaorð ok bió þar.20


[[249: iv. 5.]]

3. Þórer Lína hét maðr, es nam Breiða-vík, ok bió þar: hans syner
vóro þeir Gunnsteinn, ok Sveinungr.

Nú hefer Kolskeggr fyrer sagt um land-naóm [726].


9. 1. Þórsteinn Clegge nam fyrst Húsa-vík, ok bió þar: hans son vas
Are, es Húsvíkingar ero frá5 komner.

2. Loðmundr enn Gamle hét maðr, en annarr Biólfr, fóst-bróðer
hans. Þeir fóro til Íslannz af Vors af Þulu-nese. Loðmundr vas miok
troll-aukenn [727]. Hann skaut aondoges-súlom sínom fyr borð í hafe,
ok kvazk þar skyldo byggja sem þar ræke. En þeir fóst­broeðr10
tóko Austfiaorðo; ok nam Loðmundr Loðmundar-fiaorð, ok bió þar
þriá vettr. Þá frá hann til aondoges-súlna sínna fyr [728] sunnan
land. Efter þat bar hann á skip þat es hann átte [729].

En es segl vas undet, lagðesk hann niðr, ok bað oengan mann nefna
sik. En es hann hafðe lítla hríð leget, varð gnýrr mikill, ok15
hlióp skriða mikil á boe þann, es Loðmundr hafðe átt [730]. Efter
þat settesk hann upp, ok mælte: 'Þat es álag mítt, at þat skip skal
aldrí heilt af hafa koma heðan af, es her sigler út.'

3. Hann hélt suðr fyr Horn, ok vestr með lande allt [731] fyr
Ingolfs-haofða, [[250: iv. 5.]] ok lende nockoro vestarr. Hann nam
þar land sem súlornar haofðo á land komet, ok a miðle Hafrs-ár ok
Fúla-loekjar--þat es nú Iaokuls-aó á Sólheima-sande.--Hann bió í
Loðmundar-hvamme--þat heiter nú Sól-heimar.

4. Þá es Loðmundr vas gamall [732], bió Þrase í Skógom; hann vas5 ok
fiolkunnigr; ok vas íllt í bygð þeirra Loðmundar. Þrase sá um morgin
vatna-hlaup miket ofan. En þau vaotn veitte hann með fiolkynge sínne
austr fyr Sólheima. Þræll Loðmundar sá, ok kvað falla sió norðan
yfer landet. Loðmundr vas þá sión-lauss, ok mælte við þrælenn,
'Foerðú mer í dæle-kere [733] þat es þú kallar sió vesa.'10 Hann
goerðe svá; Loðmundr sagðe, 'Ecke þycke mer þetta siór vesa; fylgðú
mer til vatzens, ok stick stafs-brodde mínom í vatneð.' Hann goerðe
svá. Hringr vas í stafnom. Loðmundr hélt á staf­nom tveim haondom
[734], ok beit í hringinn. Því næst féllo aoll vaotnen vestr fyr
Skóga. Síðan veitte hvárr þeirra vaotnen frá ser, þar til15 es þeir
fundosk við gliúfr nockor; ok sættosk á þat, at aóen skylde falla þar
til sióvar sem skemst es.--Í þeim vatna-gange varð Sól-heima-sandr. Þar
es fiórðunga mót, ok Iokuls-aó á miðjom sande.

5. Son Loðmundar vas Sumarliðe, faðer Þórsteins Holmunz, faoðor
Þóro, móðor Steins, Brandax sonar, faoðor Þóro es átte20 Skafte
Laog(saogo)-maðr.

[[252: iv. 6.]]


10. 1. Biólfr, fóst-bróðer Loðmundar, nam Seyðis-fiaorð allan;
ok bió þar alla æve. Hann gaf Helgo, dóttor sína, Áne [735] enom
Ramma; ok fylgðe henne heiman aoll en noerðre strond Seyðis-fiarðar
til Vestdals-ár. En Ísolfr hét son Biólfs, es þar bió síðan [736],
es Seyðfirðingar 'ro frá komner.5

2. Eyvindr hét maðr, sá es út kom með Brynjolfe, ok foerðe síðan
[737] bygð sína í Mióva-fiaorð, ok bió þar. Hans son vas Hrafn, es
selde Mióva-fiarðar-land Þórkatle [738] Cloco, es þar bió síðan. Frá
hónom er Cloco-ætt komen.

3. Egill enn Rauðe hét maðr, es nam Norð-fiaorð, ok bió á Nese10 út:
hans son vas Óláfr, es Nes-menn ero frá komner.

4. Freysteinn enn Fagre hét maðr, es nam Sand-vík ok Barz-nes,
ok Hellis-fiaorð, ok Við-fiaorð.--Frá hónom ero Sandfirðingar ok
Viðfirðingar, ok Hellis-firðingar komner.

5. Þórer enn Háve, ok Crumr hét annarr: þeir fóro af Vors til15
Íslannz. Ok þá es þeir kómo ok tóko land, nam Þórer Crossa-vík ok á
miðle [739] Gerpis ok Reyðar-fiarðar.--Þaðan ero Cross-víkingar komner.

6. En Crumr nam land á Hafra-nese ok allt til Þerno-ness; ok allt et
ýtra, bæðe Skrúð [740] ok aðrar út-eyjar; ok þriú laond æðrom-megin20
Þerno-ness [741].--Þaðan ero Crymlingar komner.

[[254: iv. 7.]]

7. Ævarr vas fyrst í Reyðar-firðe, áðr harm fór upp um fiall: en
Brynjolfr í Eske-firðe, áðr hann fór at byggja Fliótz dal, sem áðr
es ritið.

8. Vémundr hét maðr, es nam Fáskrúðs-fiaorð; ok bió þar alla æve
[742]. Son hans var Olmóðr, es Olmoeðlingar 'ro frá komner.5


11. 1. Þórhaddr enn Gamle vas hof-goðe í Þrónd-heime inn á
Mærine. Hann fýstesk til Íslannz; ok tók áðr ofan hofet, ok hafðe með
ser hofs-moldena ok súlornar. En hann kom í Staoðvar-fiaorð; ok lagðe
Mærena helge á allan fiaorð-enn; ok lét oengo tortína þar nema kvik-fé
heimolo. Hann bió10 þar alla æve.--Frá hónom 'ro Staoðfirðingar komner.

2. Healte hét maðr, es nam Kleifar-laond, ok allan Breið-dal þar upp
frá [743]. Hans son vas Colgrímr, es mart manna es frá komet.

3. Herjolfr hét maðr, es nam land allt út til Hvals-nes-skriðna:
hans son vas Eyvindr Vápne, es Væpnlingar 'ro frá komner.15

4. Herjolfr, bróðer Brynjolfs, nam Heydala-land [744], fyr neðan
Tinno-dals-aó, ok út til Orms-ár. Hans son vas Ozorr, es Breið-doeler
'ro frá komner.

5. Skiaoldolfr hét maðr, es nam Streite, allt fyr útan Gnúpenn
aorðrom-megen [745] til Óss, ok til Skioldolfs-ness hiá Fagra-dals-aó
í20 [[255: iv. 7.]] Breið-dale [746]. Hans son vas Háleygr, es þar
bió síðan. Frá hónom es Háleygja-ætt komen.

6. Þióðrekr hét maðr; hann nam fyrst Breið-dal allan; en hann stoeck
braut þaðan fyrer Brynjolfe ok ofan í Bero-fiaorð, ok nam þar alla ena
noerðre straond Bero-fiarðar, ok fyr sunnan um Búlanz-nes,5 ok inn
til Rauða-skriðna aoðrom-megin; ok bió þriá vettr þar es nú heiter
Skále. Síðan keypte Biaorn enn Háve iarðer at hónom--ok ero frá hónom
Berfirðingar [747] komner.

7. Biorn Sviðin-horne hét sá maðr es nam Alfta-fiaorð enn noerðra
inn frá Rauða-skriðom, ok Sviðinhorna-dal.10

8. Þórsteinn Trumbo-bein hét frænde Baoðvars ens Hvíta, ok fór
með hónom til Íslannz. Hann nam land [748] fyr útan Leiro-vág til
Hvals-ness-skriðna. Hans son vas Collr enn Gráe, faðer Þórsteins,
faoðor Þórgríms í Borgar-haofn, faoðor Steinunnar, es átte Gizorr
byscop.15


12. 1. Boðvarr enn Hvíte--son Þórleifs Miðlungs, Baoðvars sonar
Snæ-þrimo, Þórleifs sonar Hvala-skúfs, Áns sonar, Arnar sonar [749]
Hyrno, Þóres sonar konungs, Svína-Baoðvars sonar, Cauns sonar konungs,
Solga [750] sonar, Hrólfs-sonar konungs or Berge, Svása sonar Iaotuns
norðan af Dofrom--[Hrólfr20 konungr átte Gó, es Gó-mánaðr es við
kendr, systor þeirra Górs [[257: iv. 7.]] ok Nórs, es Noregr es
við kendr]--ok Brand-Onundr, frænde hans, fóro af Vors til Íslannz,
ok kómo í Alfta-fiaorð enn Syðra.

2. Baoðvarr nam ínn frá Leiro-váge, dala þá alla, es þar liggja,
ok út annan veg til Múla, ok bió at Hofe. Hann reiste þar hof miket.5

Son Baoðvars vas Þórsteinn, es átte Þórdíse, dóttor Ozorar keiles-elgs
[751], Hrollaugs sonar. Þeirra son vas Síðo-Hallr, es átte Ióreiðe,
Þiðranda dóttor. Ok es þaðan mikil ætt komen. Son þeirra vas Þórsteinn,
faðer Ámunda, faoðor Goðrúnar.

3. Brand-Onundr nam land fyr norðan Múla, Kams-dal [752], ok10
Melracka-nes, ok inn til Hamars-ár--ok es mart manna frá hónom komet.


13. 1. Þórðr Skegge nam laond aoll í Lóne fyr norðan Iaokuls-aó
miðle ok Lóns-heiðar, ok bió í Boe tio vettr [753]. En es hann frá
til aondoges-súlna sínna í Leiro-váge fyr15 neðan Heiðe, þá selðe
hann laond sín Ulflióte Laogmanne es þar kom út í Lóne, syne Þóro,
dóttor Ketils Horða-Kára, Ásláks sonar Bifra-Kára, Ánar sonar, Arnar
sonar [754] Hyrno.--Bió Þórðr nockora vettr síðan í Lóne síðan (es)
hann spurðe til aondoges-súlna sínna.

2. En es Ulfliótr vas sextoegr at alldre, fór hann til Noregs
[755], ok20 vas þar þriá vettr. Þar setto þeir Þórleifr enn Spake,
móðor-bróðer [[259: iv. 8.]] hans, laog þau, es síðan vóro kaolloð
Ulfliótz-laog. En es hann kom út, vas sett Alþinge, ok haofðo menn
síðan ein laog á lande her.

[Law here eliminated, and transferred to Bk. II. § 2 (I, III, IX).]

3. Þórsteinn Leggr, son Biarnar Blá-tannar, fór or Suðreyjom5 til
Íslannz; ok nam laond aoll fyr norðan Horn til Iaokuls-ár í Lóne,
ok bió í Baoðvars-holte þriá vettr. Hann selðe síðan landet [756]
ok fór aftr í Suðreyjar.


14. 1. Rognvalðr iarl á Maóre, son Eysteins Glumro, Ívars sonar
Upplendinga-iarls, Halfdanar sonar ens10 Gamla: Raognvaldr átte
Ragnillde, dóttor Hrolfs Nefjo; þeirra son vas Ívarr, es fell í
Suðreyjom með Haralde kononge enom Hárfagra.

Annarr vas Gongo-Hrólfr, es vann Nordmandi.--Frá hónom ero Rúðo-iarlar
komner ok Engla konongar.15

Þriðe vas Þórer iarl Þegjande, es átte Álofo Árbót, dóttor Harallz
konungs (ens) Hárfagra; ok vas þeirra dótter Bergliót, móðer Hákonar
iarls ens Ríkja.

2. Raognvaldr iarl átte friðlo-sono þriá: hét einn Hrollaugr:
annarr Einarr: þriðe Hallaðr. Sá [757] veltesk or iarls-dómenom í20
Orkneyjom. En es Raognvaldr iarl frá þat, þá kallaðe hann saman sono
sína, ok spurðe, hverr þeirra þá vilde til Orkneyja: en Þórer bað
hann siá fyr sínne ferð. Iarl kvað hann þar skyldo ríke taka [[260:
iv. 9]] efter faoðor sínn. Þá geck Hrólfr framm, ok bauð sik til
farar. Raognvaldr kvað hónom vel hent fyr sakar afls ok hreyste;
en kvezk ætla, at meire ofse væri í skape hans, an hann mætte þegar
fyre ríke ráða [758]. Þá geck Hrollaugr fram, ok spurðe, ef hann
vilde at hann foere. Raognvaldr kvað hann ecki iarl mundo verða,5
'Hefer þú ecki styrjaldar-skaplynde; mono vegar þíner liggja til
Íslannz, ok muntú þar verða gaofogr, ok kynsæll á því lande; en
enge ero her forlaog þín.' Þá geck Einarr fram ok mælte: 'Láttú mik
fara til Orkneyja; ok mon ek þer því heita, es þer mun bazt þikkja,
at ek mun aldrigi koma aftr; né þer í augsýn.' Iarlenn10 mælte:
'Vel þicki mer at þú farer braut; en lítils es mer vaón at þer; þvi
at þín móðor-ætt es aoll þræl-boren.' Efter þat fór Einarr vestr,
ok lagðe under sik Orkneyjar--sem seger í saogo hans. Hrollaugr fór
til Harallz konongs, ok vas með hónom um hríð; þvi at þeir feðgar
kómo eige skape saman efter þetta.15

3. Hrollaugr fór síðan til Íslannz með ráðe Harallz konongs, [759]
ok hafðe með ser kono sína ok sono. Hann kom austr at Horne; ok skaut
þar fyr borð aondoges-súlom sínom; ok bar þær á land í Horna-firðe;
en hann rak undan, ok vestr fyr landet; feck hann þá úte-vist harða ok
vatn-fátt. Þeir tóko land vestr í Leiro-váge20 á Nesjom; ok vas hann
þar enn fyrsta vettr. Þá frá hann til aondoges-súlna [760] sínna;
ok fór austr þannog. Hann vas annan vettr [[261: iv. 10.]] under
Ingolfs-felle. Síðan fór hann austr í Horna-fiaorð; ok nam land austan
frá Horne til Kví-ár; ok bió fyrst under Skarz-brecko í Horna-firðe;
en síðan á Breiða-bólstað í Feliz-hverfe, þá hafðe hann lógat þeim
laondom es norðr vóro frá Borgar-haofn; en hann átte til dauða-dags
þau laond es suðr vóro frá Hegg-gerðis-múla [761].5

Hrollaugr [762] vas haofðinge mikill, ok hélt vingan við Harald
konong, en fór aldri útan [763]; ok sende konongr hónom [764] sverð,
ok aol-horn, ok goll-hring es vá fimm aura. Sverð þat átte síðan Colr,
son Síðo-Hallz, en Kolskeggr enn Fróðe hafðe séð hornet [765].

4. Hrollaugr vas faðer Ozorar keilis-elgs, es átte Gró, dóttor10
Þórðar Illoga: þeirra dótter vas Þórdís, móðer Hallz á Síðo. Annarr
son Hrollaugs vas Hróalldr, faðer Óttars Hval-roar.

Onundr vas enn þriðe son Hrollaugs. [766]

5. Ketill hét maðr, es Hrollaugr selðe Horna-fiarðar-straond, útan
frá Home, ok inn til Hamra. Hann bió at Meðal-felle. Frá15 hónom ero
Horn-firðingar komner.

[[263: iv. 10.]]

6. Auðunn enn Rauðe keypte land at Hrollauge, útan frá Haomrom, ok
út aoðrom-megin til Við-borz. Hann bió í Hofs-felle, ok reiste þar
hof miket. Frá hónom ero Hofs-fellingar komner.

7. Ulfr [767] enn Vorske keypte land at Hrollauge suðr frá
Heina-bergs-aóm5 til Hegg-gerðis-múla; ok bió at Skála-felle fyrstr
manna. Frá hónom ero Vorsar komner.

8. Síðan foerðe Ulfr bú sítt í Pappýle ok bió á Breiða-bólstað;
ok es þar haugr hans, ok svá Þórgeirs-haugr [768]. Þórgeirr vas son
Vorsa-Ulfs, ok bió at Hofe í Pappyle.10

9. Þórsteinn enn Skialge keypte land at Hrollauge, allt frá Við-borðe,
suðr um Mýrar til Heina-bergs-ár. Hans son vas Vestmárr [769] es
Mýra-menn ero frá komner.

10. Þórðr Illoge, son Eyvindar Eiki-krox, Helga sonar, Helga sonar,
Biarnars onar Buno: hann braut skip sítt á Breiðár-sande.15 Hónom
gaf Hrollaugr land á miðle Iaokuls-ár ok Kví-ár. Hann bió under Felle
við Breið-aó. Hans syner vóro þeir, Orn Sterke, es deilðe við Þórdíse
Iarls dóttor, systor Hrollaugs [770]; ok Eyvindr Smiðr. Doettr hans
vóro þær Groa, es Ozorr átte; ok Þórdís, móðer Þórbiargar, móðor
Þórðar Illoga, es vá Víga-Scúto.20


15. 1. Asbiorn hét maðr, son Heyangrs-Biarnar, hersiss or Sogne;
hann vas son Helga, Helga sonar, Biarnar [[264: iv. 10.]] sonar Buno
[771]. Hann andaðesk í Íslannz hafe þá es hann vilde út fara; en
Þórgerðr kona hans fór út ok syner þeirra.

2.  [772]En þat vas mælt, at kona skylde eige víðara nema land an leiða
mætte kvígo tvæ-vetra vár-langan dag sól-setra miðle, half stalit [773]
naut ok haft vel. Því leidde Þórgerðr kvígo sína undan Tofta-felle5
skamt frá Kví-aó suðr, ok í Kiðja-leit [774] hiá Iaokuls-felle [775]
fyr vestan.

3. Þórgerðr nam þar land um allt Ingolfs-(haofða)-hverfe, á miðle
Kví-ár ok Iaokuls-ár; ok bió at Sand-felle. Hennar son vas Ozorr í
Backa-holte; ok enn ellre Veðormr, faðer Þóríðar10 hof-gyðju. Ozorr
vas faðer Þórðar Freys-goða. Alfeiðr vas móðer Þórðar Freys-goða,
ok Þóríðar hof-gyðjo.

[S: Ásbiorn fór til Íslannz ok dó í hafe; en Þórgerðr kona hans,
ok syner þeirra kvómo út, ok naómo allt Ingolfs-haofða-hverfe á mille
Kví-ár ok Iokuls-ár, ok bió hon at Sandfelle, ok15 Guðlaugr, son þeirra
Ásbiarnar, efter hána. Frá honom ero Sand­fellíngar komner. Annarr
son þeirra vas Þórgils, es Hnapp­fellingar ero frá komner. Þriðe vas
Ozorr faðer Þórðar Freys-goða, es mart manna es frá komet.]

4. Helge hét annarr son Heyangrs-Biarnar. Hann fór til Íslannz,20
[[266: iv. 10.]] ok bió at Rauða-loek, at ráðe Þórgerðar frá
Sand-felle. Hans son vas Hilder, es Rauð-loekingar 'ro frá komner.

5. Bárðr hét enn fiórðe son Heyangrs-Biarnar, es fyr es geteð [776];
es fyrst nam Bárðar-dal norðr; en síðan fór hann suðr um Vánar-skarð,
Bárðar-gaoto; ok nam Fliótz-hverfe allt; ok bió at Gnúpom.5 Hann vas
kallaðr Gnúpa-Bárðr. Hans [777] syner vóro, Þórsteinn, Sigmundr,
Egill, Gísle [778], Nefsteinn, Þórbiorn Crumr, Hior, ok Þórgrímr;
ok Biorn, faðer Geira at Lundom, faoðor Þórkels lækniss [f. Geira,
f. Þorkels Canoca, vinar Þorláks byscops ens Helga, es sette regolo
stað í Þyckva-boe].10

6. Eyvindr Karpe nam land á miðle Almanna-fliótz ok Geir-landz-ár;
ok bió at Forse fyr vestan Moðolfs-gnúp. Syner hans vóro
þeir Moðolfr Smiðr, faðer þeirra Hrólfs ok Ketils, ok Ástríðar
Manvitz-brecku. Annarr vas Onundr, faðer Þraslaugar, móðor Tyrfings,
faoðor Teitz [779].--Áðr Almanna-fliót hloepe [780] vas þat kallat15
Rafta-loekr.


16. 1. KETILL enn FÍFLSKE, son Iórunnar Manvitz-brecku, dóttor Ketils
Flatnefs: hann fór til Íslannz af Suðreyjom, ok vas vel Cristenn. Hann
nam land á miðle Geir-lannz-ár ok Fiaðr-ár, fyr ofan Nýkoma. Ketill
bió í Kirkjo-boe.20 Þar haofðo áðr seteð Papar; ok eige maótto þar
heiðner menn bua. Ásbiaorn vas son Ketils, faoðor Þórsteins, faoðor
Surtz, faoðor Sig­vatz [[267: iv. II.]] Laogsaogo-mannz [781], faoðor
Kolbeins [f. Guðrúnar, m. Narfa ok Loðmundar Skeggja sonar].

[S: Hildr hét dótter Ásbiarnar, móðer Þóris, faoðor Hildar es
Skarpheðinn átte. Þórbiaorg hét dótter Ketels ens Fíflska; hána átte
Vale son Loðmundar ens Gamla.]5

2. Baoðmóðr hét maðr, es land nam á miðle Drífanda, ok Fiaðr-ár,
ok upp til Baoðmóðs-hrauns [782], ok bió í Baoðmóðs-tungo. Hans son
vas Óleifr, es Óleifs-borg es við kend; hann bió í Holte. Hans son
vas Vestarr, faðer Helga, faoðor Gró, es Gloeðer átte.

3. Eysteinn enn Digre fór af Sunn-Moere til Íslannz. Hann10 nam land
fyr austan Geirlandz-aó, til mótz við Ketel enn Fíflska; ok bió i
Geirlande. Hans son vas Þórsteinn frá Kelldo-gnúpe.

4. Eysteinn, son Hrana, Hildis sonar Parrax [783], fór or Norege til
Íslannz. Hann keypte land at Eysteine Digra, þau es hann hafðe numet,
ok kvað vesa Meðal-laond. Hann bió at Skarðe. Hans15 baorn vóro þau,
Hilder; ok Þórliót, es átte Þórsteinn at Keldo-gnúpe.

5. Hilder vilde foera bú sítt í Kirkjo-boe efter Ketil enn Fíflska;
ok hugðe, at þar moende heiðenn maðr bua mega. En es hann kom nær at
tún-garðe, varð hann bráð-dauðr. Hann liggr þar í20 Hildis-hauge.

[[270: iv. 12.]]

17. 1. Hrólfr hét maðr Hoeggvande; hann bió á Norð­moere. Boer hans
hét Molda-tún. Hans syner vóro þeir Vémundr, ok Molda-Gnúpr, víga-menn
mikler, ok iárn-smiðer. Vémundr kvað þetta es hann vas í smiðjo [784]:


    Ek bar einn af ellefo5
    Bana-orð. Blástú meirr!


2. Gnúpr fór fyr víga-(sakar) þeirra broeðra [785] til Íslannz, ok
nam fyr vestan Cúða-fliót til Eyjar-(ár) [786], Alfta-ver allt.--Þar
lá þá vatn mikit, ok alft-veiðr. Gnúpr vas mikil-menne, ok selðe land
þeim maonnom es síðarr kómo út; ok varð þar fiol-bygt, áðr iarð-eldr10
rann ofan. Þá floeðo aller vestr til Haofða-brecko, ok goerðo búðer
á Tiallda-velle; en Vémundr Smiðr, son Sigmundar Claokiss [787], es
þar átte land, leyfðe þeim eige þar vist. Þá fóro þeir í hrossa-garð,
ok goerðo þar skála [788], ok saóto þar um vettrenn. Þar féllo syner
Molda-Gnúps ok sialfr hann;· en Biaorn son hans hefnde hans ok15
þeirra. Biaorn fór í Grinda-vík [789], ok staðfestesk þar.

3. Biaorn hafðe ner ecke kvik-fé. Þeir vóro þá full-tíða syner
Molda-Gnúps, Biaorn, ok Gnúpr, Þórsteinn Hrungner, ok Þórðr [[271,
267: iv. 12, 11.]] Leggjalde [790]. Biaorn [791] dreymðe, at berg-bue
kveme at hónom, ok byðe at goera félag við hann; enn hann iátte. Þá
kom hafr til geita hans lítlo síðarr--því vas hann Hafr-Biaorn
kallaðr--ok tím­gaðesk þá svá skiótt fé hans, at hann [792] goerðesk
bæðe ríkr ok stór-auðigr. Þat sá ofresk kona, at allar land-vetter
fylgðo Hafr-Birne5 þá es hann fór til þings; en Þórsteine ok Þórðe,
broeðrom hans, þá es þeir fiskðo [793].

4. Hafr-Biaorn átte Iórunne, stiúp-dóttor Gnúps, bróðor síns. [Frá
Molda-gnúp es mart stór-menne komet á Íslande, bæðe byscopar ok
logmenn.]10

[S: Hafrbiorn átte ...: þeirra son vas Svertingr, es átte Húngerðe,
dóttor Þóroddz, Tungo-Oddz sonar, ok Iófríðar, Gunnars dóttor. Þeirra
dótter Þórbiaorg, móðer Sveinbiarnar, faoðor Bótolfs. Gnúpr Molda-Gnúps
son átte Arnbiaorgo, Raðorms dóttor, sem fyrr vas ritað. Iðunn vas
dótter Molda-Gnúps, es15 átte Þióstarr á Alfta-nese: Þórmóðr vas
son þeirra.]

5. Vilbaldr hét maðr, bróðer Áskels Hnoccans: þeir vóro syner
Dofnials [794]. Hann fór af Írlande, ok hafðe skip þat es Cúðe
hét. Hann kom í Cúða-fliótz-ós. Hann nam Tungo-laond aoll á miðle
[[268: iv. 11.]] Skaft-ár ok Holms-ár; ok bió í Bú-lande. Hans baorn
vóro þau Biolan, faðer Þórsteins; ok Olvér Muðr, ok Biolloc, es átte
Áslákr Aur-goðe [795].


18. 1. Leiðolfr kappe hét maðr [796]. Hann nam land fyr austan
Skaft-aó til Drífande; ok bió at Á, fyr austan5 Skaft-aó út frá Skaól;
en annat bú átte hann á Leiðolfs-staoðom under Leifolfs-felle;
ok vas þar þá mart bygða. Hann vas faðer Þórunnar, móðor Hróars
Tungo-goða. Hróarr átte Arngunne, dóttor Hámundar, systor Gunnars at
Hlíðar-enda. Þeirra baorn vóro þau Hámundr Halte, ok Ormhildr. [797]
Vébrandr hét son Hróars10 ok ambáttar. Hróarr tók Þórunne Brún,
dóttor Brynjolfs í Hvamme í Mý-dale: Þórfiðr hét son þeirra. Hróarr
bió fyrst í Ásom. Síðan tók hann Lóma-Gnúps land [798] af Eysteine,
syne Þórsteins Titlings, ok Auðar Eyvindar dóttor, systor þeirra
Moðolfs ok Branda. Þraslaug vas dótter Þórsteins Titlings, es átte
Þórðr15 Freys-goðe.

2. Onundr Tosco-bak, frænde Þórsteins-barna, skoraðe Hróar á holm á
Skafta-fellz-þinge, ok fell at fótom Hróare. Þórsteinn Upplendingr tók
Þórunne Brún, ok hafðe útan. Hróarr fór ok útan. Þá drap hann Þrost
berserk á holme, es nauðga vilde eiga [799] Sigríðe20 húsfreyjo hans;
en þeir Þórsteinn sættosk. Moðolfs syner vóro at [[269, 272: iv. 12,
13.]] víge Hróars [800], ok Þórer mágr þeirra, Brande frá Gnúpom,
ok Steinolfr bue hans. Hámundr hefnde þeirra Hróars.

3. Ísolfr hét maðr: hann fór út síð landnáma-tíðar, ok skoraðe á
Vilbald til landa eðr holm-gaongo; en Vilbaldr vilde eige berjask,
ok fór braut af Bú-lande: hann átte þá land miðle Holms-ár ok5
Cúða-fliótz. En Ísolfr fór þá í Búland ok átte land miðle Cúða-fliótz,
ok Skaft-ár. Hans son vas Rane á Rana-staoðom; en dótter Biaorg, es
átte Onundr [801], son Eyvindar Carpa. Þraslaug vas dótter þeirra,
es átte Þórarenn son Olves í Haofða.

4. Hrafn Hafnar-lykill vas víkíngr mikill. Hann for til Íslannz,10
ok nam land á miðle Holms-ár, ok Eyjar-ár; ok bió í Dyn-skógom. Hann
visse fyrer ellz-upp-kvómo, ok foerðe þá bú sítt í Lág-ey. Hans son
vas Áslákr Orgoðe.--Þaðan ero Lág-eyingar komner.

5. Eysteinn hét maðr, son Þórsteins Dranga-karls: hann fór til15
Íslannz af Háloga-lande; ok braut skip sítt, en meiddesk sialfr
í viðom. Hann bygðe Fagra-dal; en kerling eina rak af skipeno í
Kerlingar-fiaorð--þar es nú Haofð-ár-sandr.

6. Olvér, son Eysteins, nam land fyr austan Gríms-aó. Þar hafðe
enge maðr þorat at nema fyre land-vættom síðan Hiorleifr20
vas drepenn. Olver bió í Haofða. Hans son vas Þórarenn í [[273:
iv. 13.]] Haofða, bróðer sam-moeðre Halldórs, Ornolfs sonar, es Maorðr
Úrækja vá under Haomrom; ok Arnórs, es þeir Flose ok Kolbeinn, syner
Þórðar Freys-goða, vaógo á Skafta-fellz-þinge.

7. Sigmundr Cleyker, son Onundar Bíllz, Hróars sonar Horns, Bruna
sonar,5


    Es bragð vann á Brávelle [802],


nam land á miðle Gríms-ár, ok Kerlingar-ár, es þá fell fyr vestan
Haofða. [Frá Sigmunde ero þrír byscopar komner, Þorlákr enn Helge,
ok Páll, ok Brandr.]

8. Biaorn hét maðr auðigr ok skartz-maðr [803] mikill: hann fór til10
Íslannz af Valdrese, ok nam land á miðle Kerlingar-ár ok Hafrs-ár; ok
bió at Reyne. Hann átte íllt við Loðmund enn Gamla. [Frá Reyni-Birne
er enn Helge Þorlákr byscop komenn.]


19. 1. Loðmundr enn Gamle nam land á miðle Hafrs-ár ok Fúla-loekjar,
sem fyrr es ritið--þat hét þá Fúla-loekr,15 es nú es Iaokuls-aó á
Sólheima-sande, es skilr lannz-fiórð-unga.--Loðmundr átte mart barna
[804]. Valr hét son hans, faðer Sigmundar, es átte Oddlaugo, dóttor
Eyvindar ens Eyverska.

2. Sumar-liðe hét annarr son Loðmundar, faðer Þórsteins Hol-munz
í Maork, faoðor Þóro, móðor Steins, faoðor Þóro, móðor Surtz20 ens
Hvíta Skafta-stiúps; hann vas Sumarliða son. Skafte laog­(saogo)maðr
[805] [[274: iv. 13.]] átte Þóro síðarr an Sumar-liðe.--Þat seger í
Olvus-inga-kyne [806].

3. Vémundr hét þriðe son Loðmundar, faðer Þórkaotlo es átte Þórsteinn
Vífl [807].  Þeirra dótter vas Arnkatla, móðer Hróa ok Þórdísar,
es átte Steinn Brandax [808]: þeirra dótter Þóra.5

Are hét enn fiórðe son Loðmundar: ok Hroalldr hét enn fimte [809].

4. Ófeigr hét son Loðmundar laun-getenn; hann átte Þras-laugo,
Eyvindar dóttor.

Frá hónom [810] es mart manna komet.

5.  [811]Nú ero ritin land-naóm í Austfirðinga-fiórðunge; efter því
sem10 vitrer menn ok fróðer hafa sagt. Hefer í þeim fiórðunge mart
stór-menne veret síðan, ok þar hafa margar stórar saogor goersk.






IV. Here beginneth the Settlement of the East-frith-folk Quarter, and
men say this, that this Quarter was the first full settled in Iceland.

1. 1. Gund-wolf Cropp was the name of a man, the son of Thore
Hawk-neb, a lord or herse. He took in settlement Gund-wolf's-wick,
and Gund-wolf's-fell, and Lang-ness beyond Helcund-heath, and dwelt
at Fair-wick. His son was Scule-hercia, the father of Gar-laug.

2. Finn was the name of a man that took in settlement Fin-frith and
Wood-frith. His son was Thor-arin, the father of Sigrod, the father
of Glera-Hall.

3. Hrod-gar the White, the son of Hrapp, took in settlement
Sand-wick from the north of Thick-ness to Wood-frith, and dwelt at
Sceg-stead. His daughter was Inge-borg, whom Thor-stan the White had
to wife.

4. Alric was the brother of Hrod that came out with him. He was the
father of Leot-wolf, gode of Swar-fads-dale.


2. 1. Ey-wind Weapon and Ref [Fox] the Red, the sons of Thor-stan
Thick-leg, came to Iceland from Strind in Throw-end-ham, because they
fell out with king Harold, and each of them had his own ship. Ref
was driven back, and king Harold had him slain; but Ey-wind came to
Weapon-frith, and took in settlement all the frith from the west of
West-dale-water, and dwelt at Inner Cross-wick. His son was Thor-beorn.

2. Stan-beorn Cart was the name of a son of Ref the Red. He went to
Iceland and put in at Weapon-frith. Ey-wind, his father's brother,
gave him all the land between Weapon-frith and West-dale-water. He
dwelt at Temple. His sons were these: Thor-mod Stick-bligh, that
dwelt at Sun-dale; another [was] Ref of Ref-stead; the third Egil of
Egil-stead, the father of Thor-arin, and of Thrast, and of Hall-beorn,
and of Hall-frida, whom Thor-kell, Geiti's son, had to wife.

3. Hrod-wald Biolan was the sworn-brother of Ey-wind Weapon. He took
land in settlement west of West-dale-water, half the dale, and all
Shiel-water-dale out to Thick-ness. He dwelt at Turf-stead. His son
was Is-red, the father of Gun-hilda, whom Orde, the son of As-wolf
of Head, had to wife.


3. 1. Alwe the White was the name of a man, the son of Os-wald,
son of Oxen-Thore. He was a lend-man or thegen, and dwelt at
Elm-dale. He fell out with earl Hacon, Grit-gard's son, wherefore
he went forth to Yria, and there he died; but Thor-stan the White,
his son, came to Iceland, and put into Weapon-frith in his own ship,
after the settlement. He bought land of Ey-wind Weapon, and dwelt at
Toft-field, beyond Sirec-stead, certain winters before he got hold
of Temple-land by this means: he called in the money he had lent to
Stan-beorn Cart, but he had no means but his land to pay it; and there
Thor-beorn dwelt sixty winters afterwards, and he was a wise man and
of good counsel. He had to wife Ingi-borg, daughter of Hrod-gar the
White. Their children were these: Thor-gils, and Thord, Ean-wend,
and daughters Thor-borg and Thora. Thor-gils had to wife As-were,
daughter of Thore Grout-Atlesson. Their son was Brord-Helge, that had
to wife first Halla, daughter of Lytings, the son of Arne-beorn. Their
son was Fighting-Bearne; he had to wife Rand-weig, the daughter
of Eiric of God-dales. Their son was Sceg-Brord or Beardie-Brord,
and their daughter Yngw-hild, whom Thor-stan, Hall's son, had to
wife. Beardie-Brord had to wife God-run, the daughter of Þor-aren
Sealing and of Hall-dora, Einar's daughter. Their children were Thore
and Bearne Long-house. Thore had to wife Stan-wen, the daughter of
Thor-grim the High. Their daughter was God-run, whom Flosi, Colban's
son, had to wife. Their son was Bearne, the father of Bearne, that
had to wife Halla, Eor-wend's daughter.

2. Thor-stan Torfe and Lyting, two brethren, came to Iceland. Lyting
took in settlement all East Weapon-frith-strands, Bead-were's-dale, and
Fair-dale, and dwelt at Cross-wick, and lived there a few winters. From
them are come the Weapon-frith-men. Geite, the father of Thor-kell,
was the son of Lyting.

3. Thor-fin was the name of a man that first dwelt at Sceg-stead
by the rede or counsel of Thord-halm. His son was Thor-stan the
Fair that slew Einar, the son of Thore, Grout-Atle's son, and his
[Thor-stan's] two brothers Thor-kell and Hedin, that slew Thor-gils,
the father of Brord-Helga.

4. Thor-stan Torve took in settlement all Lithe, out from Os-fells
and up to Hwan-water, and dwelt at Force-field. His son Thor-wald,
father of Thor-gar, father of Hall-gar, father of Rap of Force-field.

5. Hacon was the name of a man that took in settlement all
Iockle's-dale from the west of Iockle's-river. His daughter
was Thor-borg, that the sons of Bryn-wolf the Old, Gund-beorn and
Hall-grim, had to wife. There was a tag of land not taken in settlement
that lay between Thor-stan Torfe and Hacon; they gave it to the Temple,
and it is now called Temple-tag.

6. Shield-wolf, We-mund's son, the brother of Berdle-Care,
took in settlement Iockle-dale east of Iockle-river, and up from
Cnefils-dale-water, and dwelt at Shield-wolf-stead. His children were
Thor-stan, that had to wife Fast-ny, daughter of Bryn-wolf the Old,
and Sigrid, whom Ozor, Bryn-wolf's son, had to wife. Their son was
Berse, after whom Bersi-stead is named.

7. Thord Thwart, the son of Thor-wolf Halm, the brother of Helge
Buna-haus. He took in settlement all Tongue-land between Iockle's-river
and Loch-fleet out beyond Rang-river. His son was Thor-wolf Halm,
that had to wife God-rid, daughter of Bryn-wolf the Old. Their son
was Thord Thwart, the father of Thor-ord, the father of Brand.

8. Ozur Brisket took land in settlement between Worm's-river and
Rang-water.  He had to wife God-ny, the daughter of Bryn-wolf. Their
son was As-mund, the father of Mord.


4. 1. Cetil and Grout-Atle, the sons of Thore Thidrand, went forth out
of Were-dale to Iceland, and took land in settlement in Fleet-dale
before Bryn-wolf came out. Cetil took in settlement both banks of
Lake-fleet from the west of Fleet-water, between Hang-force-river
and Worm's-river.

2. Cetil went abroad and was with We-thorm, the son of We-mund the
Old. Then he bought of We-thorm Erne-heid, daughter of earl Os-beorn
Skerry-blesa, whom Holm-fast, We-thorm's son, had taken captive;
what time Grim, We-thorm's sister's son, slew earl Os-beorn in the
Southreys. Cetil Thrym bought Erne-heid dearer by two shares than the
price We-thorm priced her,* but before she and Cetil went to Iceland,
Erne-heid found much silver under the roots of a tree, and hid it from
Cetil till he took her to wife. They came out to Iceland together
and dwelt at Erne-heid's-stead. Their son was Thidrand, the father
of Cetil of Niard-wick.

S*: Then Cetil made a bridal for her, and after that Erne-heid found
much buried treasure under a tree-root. Then Cetil offered to take
her home to her kinsmen, but she chose to stay with him. See note,
Dropl. ch. 1.

3. Grout-Atle took in settlement the east strand of all Lake-fleet
between Gill and Field-ness, west of Oxen-beck. His sons were these:
Thor-beorn and Thori, that had to wife As-wera, Bryn-wolf's daughter.


5. 1. Thor-gar, West-here's son, was the name of a man of birth. He
had three sons, and one of them was Bryne-wolf the Old; the second was
Æw-here the Old; the third was Here-wolf. They all went to Iceland,
each in their own ship.

2. Bryne-wolf came in his ship into Ash-fiord, and took in settlement
land down from the Fell, all Fleet-dale down from Hang-force-water on
the west, and down from Gils-water on the east, and all Slip-dale,
and also the field or plain to Ey-wind's-river, and took much of
the settlement of Una, Gard-here's son, and peopled it there with
his kinsmen and kinsmen-in-law. He had ten children; and afterwards
he took to wife Helga, whom his brother Here-wolf had had to wife,
and they had three children. Their son was Ozur, the father of Berse,
the father of Holm-stan [Amala-stan], the father of Urækia, the father
of Holm-stan.

3. Æw-here the Old was the name of a man, the brother of Bryne-wolf. He
came out to Iceland and into Reyd-frith, and went up over the
fell. Bryne-wolf gave him all Slip-dale down from Gils-water. He
dwelt at Arnold-stead. He had two sons and three daughters.

4. Is-rod [S: As-rod] was the name of a man that took to wife
As-were, the daughter of Hare-wolf, the brother's daughter and the
step-daughter of Bryne-wolf. There came with her [as her portion or
dowry] all the land between Gil-water and Ey-wind's-river. They dwelt
at Cetil-stead. Their son was Thor-wald Hol-barc [Hollow-weasand], the
father of Thor-berg, the father of Haf-Leot, the father of Thor-hard
Bowl. The daughter of Hol-barc was Thor-wen, whom Thor-beorn,
Grout-Atle's son, had to wife. Another was As-trid, the mother of
As-beorn Shag-head, the father of Thor-arin of Seyd-frith, the father
of As-beorn, the father of Col-sceg the historian, and of Ingi-laf,
the mother of Hall, the father of Fin the Speaker of the Laws.


6. 1. Raven-kell was the name of a man, the son of Raven. He came
out late in the time of the settlement. He stayed the first winter
at Broad-dale, but in the spring he went up over the fell.

2. He baited in Slip-dale, and there he slept. Then he dreamed that
a man came to him, and bade him get up and go away as fast as he
could. He woke up and went away, and when he was gone a short way, the
whole hill fell down and overwhelmed a boar and a bull which he had.

3. Afterwards he took in settlement Raven-kell's-dale, and dwelt at
Stan-red-stead. His son was As-beorn, the father of Helge and of Thore,
the father of Raven-kell gode, the father of Swegen-beorn.


7. 1. Une the Danish or the Unborn [posthumous or Cæsarian], the son
of Gard-here that found Iceland, came to Iceland by the counsel of
king Harold Fairhair, and was minded to subdue the land under him,
and the king had promised to make him earl there when he had done
so. Une landed at the place that is now called Une-mouth, and housed
himself there. He took in settlement the land for his own estate,
from the south of Lake-fleet the whole country side to Une's-beck.

2. But when the men of the land came to know what he meant to
do they began to be ruffled with him, and would not sell him any
livestock nor food; wherefore he was not able to maintain himself
there. Then Une went away thence and came into South Elfet's-frith;
but he was not able to settle down with his household there. Then he
departed from the east with twelve men, and came in the winter to the
house of Leod-wolf the Champion of Shaw-wharf. He received them. Une
set his mind upon Thor-wen, Leod-wolf's daughter, and she was with
child in the spring. Then Une tried to steal away with his men, but
Leod-wolf rode after him, and they met by Flangi-stead and fought,
for Une would not go back with Leod-wolf. There fell some of Une's
men; and in the end he went back unwilling, for Leod-wolf would have
him take the woman to wife, and set up his household there, and take
the inheritance after him. A little later Une stole away at a time
when Leod-wolf was away from home; but Leod-wolf rode after him as
soon as he was aware of it, and they met by Calf-pits. He [Leod-wolf]
was then so wroth that he slew Une and all those that were with him.

The son of Une and Thor-wen was Hrod-gar gode of Tongue. He took all
the inheritance of Leod-wolf, and was the most powerful of men. He
had to wife Arn-gund, the daughter of Heah-mund, and sister of
Gund-here of Lith-end. Their son was Ha-mund the Halt, the greatest
of man-slayers. Tiorwe the Mocker and Gund-here were Hrod-gar's
sister's sons.

3. Tiorwe asked for As-trid Man-wit's-brink, the daughter of Mod-wolf,
to wife; but her brethren, Cetil and Hrod-wolf, would not give him
the woman, but gave her to Thore, Cetil's son, to wife. Then Tiorwe
drew their likenesses on the wall of the gong, and every evening
when Hrod-gar's folk went to gong, he would spit in the face of
Tiorwe's likeness and kiss'd her's, till Hrod-gar scraped them off
the wall. After that Tiorwe carved them on the haft or handle of his
knife, and quoth these verses:--



    I painted Thore's young wife on the wall:
    Now I have cut her likeness on the haft of my knife.


        [See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 79, No. 1. The verses are
        sophisticated by the later editor.]


Whereof came the slaughter of Hrod-gar and his sister's sons.


8. 1. Thor-kell the Full-sage was the name of a man that took in
settlement all Niard-wick, and dwelt there. His daughter was Theod-hild
[MS.: Thor-hild], whom Æw-here the Old had to wife, and their daughter
was Yngw-hild, the mother of Cetil of Niard-wick, the son of Thidrande.

2. Winter-lide was the name of a man, the son of Arin-beorn
[Arn-beorn], the son of An-laf Long-neck, the brother of Lyting, and
of Thor-stan Torfi, and of Thor-beorn of Erne-holt. An-laf Long-neck
was the son of Beorn Whale-flitch. Winter-lide took in settlement
[land over] Borg-frith, and dwelt there.

3. Thore Line was the name of a man that took in settlement Broad-wick,
and dwelt there. His sons were these: Gund-stan and Swegenung.

Now beginneth henceforward the settlement according to the saying
of Col-sceg.


9. 1. Thor-stan Clegge [hay-bottle] first took in settlement
House-wick, and dwelt there. His son was Are, from whom the
House-wick-men are come.

2. Lod-mund the Old was the name of a man, and another was
Beo-wolf, his sworn-brother. They came to Iceland from Thule-ness in
Vors. Lod-mund was greatly possessed by a fiend [S: much strength-eked,
and a great wizard]. He cast his porch-pillars overboard while he
was at sea, and said that he would settle where they were drifted
[ashore]. And the sworn-brethren made East-frith, and Lod-mund took
in settlement Lod-mund-frith, and dwelt there three winters [S:
that winter]. Then he heard of his porch-pillars being in the south
of the country. And with that he put on board his ship all that he had.

And when the sail was hoisted he laid him down, commanding that no
man was to name him. And when he had been a little while, there was
a great rumbling noise, and they saw a great earth-slip fall upon
the homestead which Lod-mund had set up and dwelt in. After that he
sat up and spake: 'I lay this spell or doom, that no ship shall ever
come back safe from sea that sails from this haven.'

3. He held his course south of Cape Horn, and west by Heor-laf's-head,
and landed somewhat more to the west. Then he took land in settlement
where the pillars were come to land, between Goat-river and Foul-beck,
which is now called Iockle-river on Sun-ham-sand. He dwelt at
Lod-mund's-combe, which is now called Sun-ham.

4. Now at that time, when Lod-mund was grown old, Thrase dwelt at
Shaws. He was also a wizard, and they were ill neighbours, he and
Lod-mund. One morning Thrase saw a great flood of water falling down;
but he kept off the waters by his witchcraft, driving them east upon
Sun-ham. Lod-mund's thrall looked forth, and told him that a sea
was falling upon the land from the north. Lod-mund was at that time
sightless, and he said to the thrall, 'Bring me here in a bilge-basin
a little of what thou callest the sea.' He did so. Then Lod-mund said,
'I do not think it is the sea. Do thou take me down to the water,
and put the heel of my staff in the water.' He did so. There was
a ring on the staff. Lod-mund held the staff with his two hands,
and bit the ring, and straightway all the waters began to fall to
the west of Shaw. And so each of them [Lod-mund and Thrase] kept the
waters away from his land, till they met at a certain chine; and agreed
upon this, that the river should fall there to the sea at the place
where the course was shortest. In this flood of waters Sun-ham-sand
was formed. It is the boundary of the Quarter, and Iockle-river runs
through the midst of the sand.

5. Lod-mund's son was Summer-lide, the father of Thor-stan
Hollow-mouth, the father of Thora, the mother of Stan Brand-ax's son,
the father of Thora, whom Skafte or Shafto the Law-speaker had to wife.


10. 1. Beo-wolf, the sworn-brother of Lod-mund, took in settlement all
Seethe-frith, and dwelt there all his life. He gave his daughter Helga
to An the Strong, and there came home with her [as marriage portion]
all the north strands of Seethe-frith up to West-dale-water. But
Is-wolf was the name of Beo-wolf's son. He dwelt there afterwards,
and from him are the Seethe-frith-folk come.

2. Ey-wind was the name of a man that came out to Iceland with
Bryne-wolf, and afterwards flitted to Mew-frith, and dwelt there. His
son was Raven, that sold Mew-frith-land to Thor-kettle Clack. From
him the Clack Family is come.

3. Egill the Red was the name of a man that took North-frith in
settlement, and dwelt out at Ness. His son was An-laf, from whom the
Men of Ness are come.

4. Frey-stan the Fair was the name of a man that took in settlement
Sand-wick, and Bard's-ness, and Cave-frith, and Wood-frith, and dwelt
at Bard-ness. From him are come the Men of Sand-wick, and the Men o'
Wood-frith, and the Men of Cave-frith.

5. Thore the Tall and Crum were the names of two men that came from
Vors to Iceland, and when they came and took land, Thore took in
settlement Cross-wick and the land between Gerpi and Reyd-frith. Thence
are the Cross-wick-men come.

6. But Crum took land in settlement in Goat-ness as far as Fern-ness,
but all outside, both Shroudey and the other out isles, and their
lands or estates the other side of Tern-ness. From him are the
Crum-lings come.

7. Æw-here was first in Reyd-frith before he went up over the fell, and
Bryne-wolf dwelt in Ash-frith before he went up to settle Fleet-dale,
as it is written before.

8. We-mund was the name of a man that took in settlement all
Fa-scrud's-frith, and dwelt there all his life. His son was Aul-mod,
from whom the Aul-mod-lings are come.


11. 1. Thor-heard the Old was Temple-gode in Throwend-ham, inside
on the More. He was moved to go to Iceland, and he took down the
temple, and carried with him the mould and the porch-pillars. And he
put into Stead-frith, and laid the hallowing or sacredness of More
upon the whole frith, and suffered nothing to be put to death there
save tame cattle. He dwelt there all his life, and from him are the
Stead-frith-men come.

2. Healte or Sholto was the name of a man that took in settlement
Cleve-land and all Broad-dale up from it. His son was Col-grim,
from whom many men are come.

3. Here-wolf was the name of a man that took in settlement all out
to Whales-ness-slip. His son was Ey-wind Weapon, that the Weaponlings
are come from.

4. Here-wolf, the brother of Bryne-wolf, took in settlement
Hay-dale-land, north of Tinder-dale or Flint-dale-water, and out to
Worms-river. His son was Ozur, from whom the Broad-dale-men are come.

5. Shield-wolf was the name of a man that took in settlement all
Streit [Strath] beyond the Peak on the other side to Oyce, and to
Shield-wolf's-ness hard by Fair-dale-water in Broad-dale. His son was
Halig, that dwelt there afterwards. From him is the Halega Family come.

6. Theod-rec was the name of a man. He first took in settlement
all Broad-dale, but he bolted away thence for fear of Bryne-wolf,
and down to Bear-frith; and there took in settlement all the nether
strand of Bear-frith, and on the south over By-land's-ness and on to
Red-slip on the other side, and there he dwelt three winters at the
place now called Hall. Afterwards Beorn the Tall bought the lands of
him, and from him are the Bear-frith-folk come.

7. Beorn Singe-horn was the name of a man that took in settlement
Nether Elfet's-frith inward from Red-slips and Singe-horn-dale.

8. Thor-stan Drum-leg was the name of a kinsman of Bead-were the White,
and went with him to Iceland. He took land in settlement from out of
Lear-voe to Whales-ness-slip. His son was Coll the Grey, the father
of Thor-stan, the father of Thor-grim of Borg-frith, the father of
Stein-unn, whom bishop Gizor had to wife.


12. 1. Bead-were the White was the son of Thor-laf Mid-lung, the
son of Bead-were Snow-thrim, the son of Thor-laf Whale-fringe, the
son of An, the son of Erne Horn, the son of king Thore, the son of
Swine-Bead-were, the son of king Caun, the son of king Saulge, the
son of king Hrod-wolf o' the Rock, the son of Swace the Giant from
the north of Dofre or Dover--[king Hrod-wolf had to wife Go, after
whom the mouth is called Goe; she was sister to Gor and Nor, after
whom Norway was called. This is a gloss]--and Brand Ean-wend, his
kinsman, went from Vors to Iceland, and put into South Elfet's-frith.

2. Bead-were took in settlement inward from Lear-voe all the dales
that lie there and on the other side to Mull, and dwelt at Temple. He
reared there a great temple.

The son of Bead-were was Thor-stan, that had to wife Thor-dis, the
daughter of Ozur Keilis-elg, the son of Hrod-laug. Their son was
Hall o' Side, that had to wife Ioreid, the daughter of Thidrande,
and from him is a great family come. Their son was Thor-stan, the
son of Amund, the father of Gud-run.

3. Brand Ean-wend took land north of Mull, Cam's-dale and Melracca-ness
[White Fox-ness], and inward up to Hammer-river; and there are many
men come from him.


13. 1. Thord Beard [Pedigree, see Bk. I. 4. 2] took in settlement all
the land in the Wash north of Iockle-river, between it and Wash-heath,
and dwelt at By ten winters; but when he heard of his porch-pillars
being at Lear-voe down below the Heath or Moor, then he sold his
land to Wolf-leot the Lawman, who came out thither to the Wash, the
son of Thora, the daughter of Cetil Haurda-Care, the son of As-lac
Beaver-Care, the son of An, the son of Erne Horn. Thor dwelt some
winters after at Wash, after he heard news of his porch-pillars. But
when Wolf-leot was sixty years old he went to Norway, and was there
three winters. There he and Thor-laf the Sage, his mother's brother,
made the constitution that was afterwards called Wolf-Leot's Laws. But
when he came back to Iceland the All-Moot was established, and ever
after men had but one law here all over the country.

3. Thor-stan Leg, the son of Beorn Blue-tooth, came out of the
Southreys to Iceland, and took in settlement all the lands north of
Cape Horn to Iockle-river in the Wash, and dwelt at Bead-were's-holt
three winters. Then he sold his land and went back to the Southreys.


14. 1. Regin-wald earl of More, the son of Ey-stan Glumra, the son of
Iwar the earl of the Upland-men, the son of Half-dan the Old, had to
wife Ragin-hild, the daughter of Hrod-wolf Nefia. Their son was Iwar,
that fell in the Southreys [Hebrides] with king Harold Fairhair.

Another was Walker Hrod-wolf, that won Northmandy. From him are the
earls of Ruda [Rouen] come and the kings of the English.

The third was earl Thore the Silent, that had to wife Alofa
Season-betterer, the daughter of king Harold Fairhair. Their daughter
was Berg-leod, the mother of earl Hacon the Mighty.

2. Regin-wald had three bastard sons: one called Hrod-laug, the second
Einar, the third Hallad, that turned himself out of the earldom in the
Orkneys. And when Regin-wald heard of this, he called to him his sons,
and asked which of them would go to the Orkneys; but Thore bade him
settle as to whether he should go or not. The earl said he did well,
but that he must take the earldom [of More] after his father. Then
Hrod-wolf came forward and offered to go. Regin-wald said that he
was well fitted to go by reason of his strength and bravery; but he
said that he thought that there was too much adventure in his nature
to allow him to sit down quietly in the earldom. Then Hrod-laug came
forward and asked if he wished him to go. Regin-wald said that he would
never be an earl, 'thou hast no stomach of war in thee. Thy way shall
lie out to Iceland, and thou shalt be a man of rank, and blessed in
thy family; but thy fate doth not lie here.' Then Einar came forward,
and said, 'Let me go to the Orkneys, and I will promise thee that
which thou wilt like best of all things, to wit, that I will never
come back into thy sight.' Said the earl, 'I am well pleased for thee
to go away, but I have little hope in thee, for thy mother's kin are
all thrall-born.' After that Einar went into the west, and subdued
the Orkneys under him, as it is told in the History of him.

Hrod-laug went to king Harold and was with him for a while, for he
and his father could not get on well after this.

3. Afterwards Hrod-laug went forth to Iceland by the counsel of
king Harold, having with him his wife and his son. He made land
east of Horn, and then cast overboard his porch-pillars, and they
came ashore in Horn-frith; but he was driven off away westward
round the land, and now he had a hard voyage, and ran short of
water. They came ashore west in Lear-voe at the Ness, and there he
stayed the first winter. Then he heard of his porch-pillars, and went
to the coast to where they were. He stayed the second winter under
Ing-wolf's-fell. Then he went eastward into Horn-frith, and took in
settlement the land east of Cape Horn to Fold-water, and at first
dwelt under Pass-brink in Horn-frith, but afterwards at Broad-bowster
in Fell's-wharf. He had parted then with the lands that lay north of
Borg-haven; but he owned to the day of his death the lands that were
south of Haw-thorn-fence-mull. Hrod-laug was a great chief, and kept
up friendship with king Harold, but never went abroad [to Norway]
again. [M: And he never went to see his father, earl Regin-wald,
because he was not friendly with his step-mother.] And the king sent
him [M: treasures on the day he died] a sword, and an ale-horn, and
a gold ring that weighed 5 ozs. This sword Coll, the son of Hall o'
Side, afterwards had, but Col-sceg the Wise had seen the horn.

4. Hrod-laug was the father of Ozur Ceilis-Eik, that had to wife
Gro, the daughter of Thord Bad-heart. Their daughter was Thor-dis,
the mother of Hall o' Side. Another son of Hrod-laug was Hrod-wald,
the father of Oht-here Whale-roe [Spermaceti].

5. Cetil was the name of a man to whom Hrod-laug sold Horn-frith-stead,
from west of the Horn and inland to Hammer [Cliff]. He dwelt at
Middle-fell. From him are the Horn-frith-men come.

6. Ead-wine the Red bought land of Hrod-laug, out from Hammer and on
the other side to Wood-ford. He dwelt at Temple-fell, and reared a
great temple there. From him are the Men of Temple-fell come.

7. Wolf the Worsh bought land of Hrod-laug, south from Hoan-rock-river
to Horn-fence-mull, and dwelt at Horn-fell first of all men. From
him are the Worsh-men come.

8. Afterwards Wolf flitted his homestead to Papyli [the place of
Irish papae], and dwelt at Broad-bowster, and there is his barrow,
and also Thor-gar's howe. Thor-gar was the son of Worsh-wolf, and
dwelt at Temple in Papyli.

9. Thor-stan Squint bought land of Hrod-laug, all from Wood-bord
south over Mire up to Horn-quarry-river. His son was West-mere,
from whom the Mire-men or Fen-men are come.

10. Thord Evil-heart [was] the son of Ey-wind Oak-crook, the son
of Helge, the son of Helge, the son of Beorn Buna [line probably
lost]. He ran his ship ashore on Broad-water-sand. Hrod-laug gave him
land between Iockle-water and Fold-river. He dwelt under Fell over
against Broad-water. His sons were these: Erne the Strong, that had
a feud with Thor-dis, Earl's daughter, the sister of Hrod-laug, and
Ey-wind the Smith. His daughters were these: Groa, whom Ozur had to
wife, and Thor-dis, the mother of Thor-borg, the mother of Thor-dis,
the mother of Thord Evil-heart, that slew Slaughter-Scuta.


15. 1. As-beorn or Os-beorn was the name of a man, the son of Heyang
Beorn, lord or herse of Sogn. He was the son of Helge, the son of
Helge, the son of Beorn Buna. He died in the sea of Iceland as he was
on his way out; but Thor-gerd, his wife, reached Iceland and their
sons with her.

2. Now it was held law, that a woman should not take in settlement
more land than a quhae or heifer of two years old could go round on
a spring day from sunrise to sunset, a half-stalled neat, and well
kept. Wherefore Thor-gerd led her heifer under Toft-fell a short way
from Fold-river in the south, and into Kid-point, hard by Iockle's-fell
on the west.

3. Then Thor-gerd took in settlement land over all
Ing-wolf's-head-wharf, between Fold-river and Iockle-river, and
dwelt at Sand-fell. Her son was Ozur of Bank-holt, and the elder
was We-thorm, the father of Thor-rid Temple-priestess. Ozur was the
father of Thord Freys gode. Alf-heid was the mother of Thord Freys
gode and Thor-rid Temple-priest.

[S: Double text. As-beorn went forth to Iceland, but died at sea,
and Thor-gerd, his wife and her sons, came out to Iceland, and
took in settlement all Ing-wolf's-head-wharf between Fold-water and
Iockle-river, and she dwelt at Sand-fell, and Gud-laug, the son of her
and Os-beorn, after her. From him are come the Sand-fell-men. Another
son of theirs was Thor-gils, from whom the Hnap-fell-men are come. The
third Ozur, the father of Thord Frey's gode or priest, from whom many
men are come.]

4. Helge was the name of another son of Heyang Beorn. He went to
Iceland, and dwelt at Red-beck by rede of Thor-gerd of Snow-fell. His
son was Hild, whence the Red-beck-men are come from.

5. Bard [S: Thord] was the name of the third son of Heyang Beorn,
who is spoken of before [Bk. III. 17]. He first took in settlement
Bard-dale in the north, but afterwards went south and over the pass of
Good Hope by Bard-gate, and took in settlement all Fleets-wharf, and
dwelt at Peak. He was called Beorn of the Peak. His sons were these:
Thor-stan, and Sig-mund, and Egil, and Gisle, Neb-stan, Thor-beorn
Crum, Heor, and Thor-grim, and Beorn, the father of Gar of Grove,
the father of Thor-kell Leech.

6. Ey-wind Carpe took land in settlement between All-men's-fleet and
Gore-land's-water, and dwelt at Force, west of Mod-wolf's-peak. His
sons were these--Mod-wolf Smith, the father of these: Calf and Cetil,
and of As-trid Man-wit's-brink. Another was Ean-wend, the father
of Thras-laug, the mother of Tyrfing, the father of Tait. Before
All-men's-fleet sprung [out to sea] it was called Raft-beck.


16. 1. Cetil the Fool [Cathal?], the son of Ior-wen Man-wit's-brink,
the daughter of Cetil Flat-neb. He went to Iceland from the
Southreys, and was a good Christian. He took in settlement land
between Gore-land-water and Feather-water, above Ness-come. Cetil
dwelt at Kirkby. The papae had been settled there before, and heathen
men might not dwell there.

As-beorn was the son of Cetil, the father of Thor-stan, the father
of Swart, the father of Lawman Sigh-wat, the father of Colban, the
father of Gud-run, the mother of Narfi, and Lod-mund Scegs-son.

[S: Hild was the name of As-beorn's daughter, the mother of Thore,
the father of Hild, whom Sharp-Hedin had to wife. Thor-borg was the
name of the daughter of Cetil the Fool. Wale, the son of Lodmund the
Old, had her to wife.]

2. Bead-mod was the name of a man that took land in settlement between
Drift and Feather-water, and up to Bead-mod's lava or rawn, and dwelt
at Bead-mod's-tongue.  His son was An-laf, after whom An-laf's Castle
is named. He dwelt at Holt. His son was West-here, the father of Helge,
the father of Groa, whom Gloede had to wife.

3. Ey-stan the Fat came from South More to Iceland. He took land in
settlement east of Gore-land-water till he marched with Cetil the Fool,
and dwelt at Gore-land. His son was Thor-stan of Well-peak.

4. Ey-stan, the son of Hrane, the son of Hild Parrack, came from Norway
to Iceland. He bought land from Ey-stan the Fat, which he had taken in
settlement, and called it Middle-land. He dwelt at Pass. His children
were these: Hilde and Thor-leot, whom Thor-stan of Well's-peak had
to wife.

5. Hilde wished to flit his household to Kirkby after Cetil the Fool
[died], thinking that a heathen man might dwell there; but when he
drew nigh to the house-garth he suddenly fell down dead. There he
lies in Hilde's howe.


17. 1. Hrod-wolf Hewer or Slasher was the name of a man. He dwelt
at North More, and his homestead was called Mould-ton. His sons
were these: We-mund and Mould-peak, great fighters, and blacksmiths
both. We-mund quoth this verse [to his brother] while he was at the
smithy working:--



    I bore alone from eleven men
    The fame of slaying. Blow harder thou!


        [See Corpus Poet. Bor. i. 361.]


2. Peak came to Iceland by reason of the manslaughter he and his
brother had wrought, and took in settlement land west of Cuda-fleet,
as far as the Isle-water and all Elfet's-haunt. There was a great mere
there then, and a wild-swan chase. Peak was a man of power, and sold
land to them that came out later; and that place was thickly settled
before the earth-fire [eruption] ran down over it. Then they all fled
westward to Head-brink, and set up booths with tilts at Tilt-field
or Tent-field. But We-mund the Smith, the son of Sig-mund Cleek, who
then owned the land there, would not let him have quarters there. Then
they went into Horse-garth and built a hall there, and sat down there
through the winter. There fell the sons of Mould-peak and himself
also, but Beorn, his son, avenged them; and then Beorn went west to
Grind-wick, and took up his abode there. [S: And there arose quarrels
among them and man-slaughters there. But the next spring Mould-peak
and his son went west to Grind-wick.]

3. Beorn had almost no live-stock. Then were the sons of Mould-peak
full grown--Beorn and Peak, Thor-stan Hrungne, and Thord Layer. Beorn
dreamed one night that a Rock-man [giant] came to him and asked him
to be his partner or fellow, and he thought good to agree to this. A
little after this there came a buck to his she-goats. Hence he was
called Buck-Beorn. And then his stock throve so fast that he grew
mighty and very wealthy. A woman with second-sight used to see all
the wights or spirits of the land following Buck-Beorn when he went
to the moot; but they would follow Thor-stan and Thord, his brethren,
when they went [hunting or] fishing.

4. Buck-Beorn had to wife Ior-wen, the step-daughter of Peak his
brother.

From Mould-peak are many great men come in Iceland, both bishops
and lawmen.

[S: Buck-Beorn had to wife [blank]. Their son was Swerting, that had
to wife Hun-gerd, the daughter of Thor-ord, the son of Ord o' Tongue
and of Io-frida, Gun-here's daughter. Their daughter was Thor-borg,
the mother of Swegen-beorn, the father of Bot-olf.

Peak, Mould-peak's son, had to wife Arin-borg, Rathorm's daughter,
as it is written before.

Id-wen was a daughter of Mould-peak, whom Thiost-here of Elfet's-ness
had to wife. Thor-mod was their son.]

5. Wil-bald was the name of a man, the brother of As-kell Hnockan. They
were the sons of Duf-nial. He came from Ireland, and had the ship that
was called Cude [     ?     ]. He put into Cude-fleet-mouth. He took
in settlement all Tongue lands between Shaft-water and Holm-river,
and dwelt at By-land. His children were these: Beolan, the father
of Thor-stan, and Olwe Mouth, and Biolloc, whom Aslac Aur-gode had
to wife.


18. 1. Leod-wolf the Champion was the name of a man that took in
settlement land from east of Shaft-water to Drift, and dwelt at
River east of Shaft-water, out from Bowl; and another homestead he
had at Leod-wolf-stead under Leod-wolf's-fell, and the land there was
much dwelt in at that time. Leod-wolf was the father of Thor-wen, the
mother of Hrod-gar the gode of Tongue. Hrod-gar had to wife Arn-gund,
daughter of Ha-mund, the sister of Gun-here of Lith-end. Their children
were these: Ha-mund the Halt and Orm-hild. We-brand was the name of a
son of Hrod-gar and a bond-woman. Hrod-gar carried off Thor-wen Brow,
the daughter of Bryne-wolf of Hwam in Midge-dale. Thor-fin was the
name of their son. Hrod-gar dwelt first at Ridges. Afterwards he took
Lom-peak-land from Ey-stan, the son of Thor-arin Titling and of Aud,
Ey-wind's daughter, sister of Mod-wolf and Brand. Thras-laug was the
daughter of Thor-stan Titling, whom Thord Frey's gode or priest had
to wife.

2. Ean-wend Mail-back, the kinsman of Thor-stan's children, challenged
Hrod-gar to wager of battle at Shaft-fell-moot, and fell at Hrod-gar's
feet. Thor-stan the Uplander carried off Thor-wen Brow, and took
her abroad. Hrod-gar also went abroad; and there he slew in wager
of battle Throst, a bear-sark, that wished to take his wife Sig-rid
from him against his will. But he and Thor-stan made peace. Mod-wolf's
sons, and Thore their kinsman-in-law, Brand of Peak and Stan-wolf his
neighbour, were at the slaying of Hrod-gar. Ha-mund avenged Hrod-gar
and his fellows.

3. Is-wolf was the name of a man that came out hither late in the
time of the settlement, and challenged Wil-bald to give him land,
or fight a wager of battle with him; but Wil-bald would not fight,
and went abroad out of By-land. At that time he owned the land
between Holm-water and Cude-fleet. But now Is-wolf went to By-land,
and he owned the land between Cude-fleet and Shaft-water. His son
was Ranig of Ranig-stead, and his daughter was Borg, whom Ean-wend,
the son of Ey-wind Carp, had to wife. Thras-laug was their daughter,
whom Thor-aren, the son of Olwe of Head, had to wife.

4. Raven Haven-key was a great wicking or warrior. He went to Iceland,
and took land in settlement between Holm-water and Ey-river, and
dwelt at Din-shaw. He knew of the eruption beforehand, and flitted
his household to Lowey. His son was Aslac Aur-gode, from whom the
Lagey-men are come.

5. Ey-stan was the name of a man, the son of Thor-stan Drang-carle. He
came to Iceland from Haloga-land, and wrecked his ship, but was
himself maimed by the mast [sic]. He dwelt at Fair-dale. An old
woman was drifted ashore from the ship into Carline-frith, where
Head-river-sand now is.

6. Olwe, the son of Ey-stan, took land in settlement east of
Grims-river. Before him no man had dared to take land in settlement
there since Heor-laf was slain, by reason of the wights or spirits
of the country. Olwe dwelt at Head. His son was Thor-aren of Head,
the brother by the same mother of Hall-dor, Em-wolf's son, whom
Mord Urocia slew under Cliff, and of Arnor, whom Flose and Colban,
the sons of Thord Frey's gode, slew at Shaft-fell-moot.

7. Sig-mund Cleek, the son of Ean-wend Bill, the son of Hrod-gar Horn,
the son of Brune,


    Who did a daring-do at Brafield,


took land in settlement between Grim-river and Carline-river, which
then ran west of Head.

8. Beorn was the name of a man, wealthy and a great man for show. He
came to Iceland from Walldres, and took land in settlement between
Carline-river and Buck-river, and dwelt at Rowan. He got on badly
with Lod-mund the Old.


19. 1. Lod-mund the Old took land in settlement between Buck-river and
Foul-beck, as it is written before. What is now called Iockle-river in
Sun-ham-sand, which parts the lands of the Quarter, was then called
Foul-beck. Lod-mund had [S: six sons or more]. Wale was the name
of a son of his, the father of Sig-mund, that had to wife Ord-laug,
daughter of Ey-wend the Ey-wersh [Island-dweller].

2. Another son of Lod-mund's was named Summer-lid, the father of
Thor-stan Hollow-mouth of Mark, the father of Thora, the mother of
Stan, the father of Thora, the mother of Swart the White, the step-son
of Skafte; he was Summer-lid's son. Skafte or Shafto the Law-speaker
had to wife Thora after Summer-lid, as it is said in the Genealogy
of the Aulfusings.

3. We-mund was the name of the third son of Lod-mund, the father
of Thor-katla, whom Thor-stan Weefil had to wife. Their daughter was
Arn-katla, the mother of Hrode and of Thor-dis, whom Stan, Brand's son,
had to wife. Their daughter was Thora.

Are was the name of Lod-mund's fourth son, and Hrod-wald the fifth.

4. Unfey, the sixth son of Lod-mund, was a bastard. He had to wife
Thras-laug, the daughter of Ey-wind Ey-wersh [the Island-dweller],
the sister of Ord-laug. From all of them are many men come.

5. Now are written the settlements in the East-frith-folk Quarter,
according as wise men and historians have told of them. There have
been in this Quarter many great men since, and many great histories
have taken place there.











LIB. V.

Her hefr Land-naóm í Sunnlendinga-fiórðungs, es baztr es lannz-kostr
á aollo Íslande, ok ágætaster menn hafa bygt, bæðe lærðer ok
leiker. [812]15

1. 1. Austfirðer bygðosk fyrst á Íslande. En á miðle Horna-fiarðar
ok Reykja-ness varð seinst albygt: þar réð veðr ok brim land-taoko
manna fyr hafn-leyses sakar ok oeræves. Sumer þeir es fyrster kómo út,
bygðo næster fiaollom; ok merkðo [[276: v. 1.]] at því lannz-kostena,
at kvik-féið fýstesk frá siónom til fiallanna. Þeir menn es síðan
kómo ut, þótto hiner numet hafa of víða land es fyrre kómo. En á þat
sætte Haraldr konungr þá enn Hárfagre, at enge skylde víðara nema,
an hann mætte elde yfer fara á dege með skipverjom sínom.5

2. Menn skylde eld goera þá es sól være í austre. Þá skylde goera svá
at ryke [813], svá at hvára sæe frá aoðrom. En þeir eldar, es goerver
vóro þá es sól vas í austre, skylde brenna til nætr; síðan skylde
þeir ganga til þess es sól være í vestre, ok goera þar aðra elda.10


2. 1. Þórolfr, son Herjolfs Horna-briótz, ok Óláfr bróðer hans vóro
konungar at Upplaondom.

Með þeim vas Fleinn skáld, Hiors-son, sa es foeddesk upp norðr á Moere,
í eyjo þeirre skamt frá Borgund es Iosur-heið heiter: þar bió faðer
hans. Fleinn fór til Danmerkr á fund15 Eysteins konungs, ok feck þar
mikla virðing af skáldskap sínom, svá at konungr gaf hónom dóttor sína.

2. Þrase vas son Þórolfs. Hann fór af Haorða-lande til Íslannz, ok nam
land miðle Iaokuls-ár ok Kalda-klofs-ár; ok bió á Bialla-brecku.--Þar
heita nú Þrasa-staðer, skamt austr frá forsenom; en20 leiðe Þrasa
es fyr vestan Fors-aó, heldr noer aónne, í Drangs-hlíð [[277:
v. 2.]] under gnúpenom, ok es skriða á hlaupen. Geirmundr vas son
Þrasa, faðer Þórbiarnar, faoðor Branz [814] [f. Skeggja, f. Bolla í
Skógom, f. Skeggja, f. Hildar er átte Niall í Skógom, Sigmundar-son;
þeirra s. Skegge, f. Eyjolfs, f. Branz er nú býr í Skógom [815]].

3. 1. Hrafn enn Heimske hét gaofogr maðr,--son Valgarz,5 Vémundar sonar
Orðlo-kars, Þórolfs sonar Váganefs, Hroereks sonar Sloengvand-bauga,
Harallz sonar Hilde-fannar Dana konongs.--Hann fór or Þróndheime til
Íslannz; ok nam miðle Kalda-klofs-ár ok Lamba-fellz-ár. Hann bió at
Raufar-felle [816]. Hans baorn vóro þau Helge Blá-fauskr; ok Freygerðr;
ok10 Iorundr Goðe.

2. Ásgeirr Cneif hét maðr, son Oleifs Hvíta, Skærings sonar, Þórolfs
sonar: móðer hans vas Þórhildr, dótter Þórsteins Hauga­briótz. Ásgeirr
fór til Íslannz; ok nam land miðle Selja-landz-ár ok Lamba-fellz-ár;
ok bió þar es nú [817] heiter á Auðnom: hans son vas15 Iorundr, ok
Þórkell, faðer Ogmundar, faoðor Ioans byscops [ens Helga]. Dótter
Ásgeirs vas Helga [móðer Þorunnar, m. Haollo, m. Þorláks byscops ens
Helga]. Ásgeirr hafnaðe sialfráðe blótom.

3. Þórgeirr enn Haordske, son Bárðar Blondo-horns, fór or Viggjo
or Þróndheime til Íslannz. Hann kauper land at Ásgeire20 [[279:
v. 2.]] Cneif, miðle Lamba-fellz-ár, ok Ír-ár [818], ok bió í
Holte. Faóm vetrom síðarr feck hann Ásgerðar, dóttor Asks ens Úmálga;
ok vóro þeirra syner Þórgrímr enn Mikle, ok Holta-Þórer, faðer Þórleifs
Kráks ok Skorar-Geirs.

4. Ófeigr hét maðr ágætr í Raums-dale [819]: hann varð missáttr5 við
Haralld konung, ok biósk af því til Íslannz-ferðar [820]. Hann átte
Ásgerðe, dóttor Ascs ens Úmálga. En es hann vas buenn til Íslannz,
sende Haralldr konungr menn til hans; ok lét drepa hann. En Ásgerðr
fór út með baorn þeirra, ok með henne bróðer hennar laun-getenn,
es Þórolfr hét. Ásgerðr nam land miðle Selja-lannz-múla10 ok
Markar-fliótz; ok Langa-nes allt upp til Ioldo-steins; ok bió norðan
í Cata-nese. Baorn Úfeigs ok Ásgerðar vóro þau, Þórgeírr Gollner, ok
Þórsteinn Flosco-skegg; Þórbiaorn enn Kvirre, ok Álof Elliða-skiaoldr,
es átte Þórbergr Corna-múle: þeirra baorn, Eysteinn, ok Hafþóra es
Eiðr Skeggja son átte. Þórger(ðr) vas15 (ok) [821] Ufeigs dótter,
es átte Fiðr Ottkels son.

5. Þórolfr, bróðer Ásgerðar, nam land at ráðe hennar, fyr vestan
Fliót, miðle Deilðar-á [822] tveggja; ok bió í Þórolfs-felle. Með
hónom foeddesk upp Þórgeirr Gollner, son Ásgerðar, es þar bió síðan:
hann vas faðer Nials, es inne vas brendr með átta [823] mann at
Berg-þórs-hvále.20

6. Ásbiaorn Reyrketils son ok Steinfiðr, bróðer hans, naómo land
[[281: v. 3.]] fyr ofan Cross-aó, fyr austan [824] Fliót. Steinfinnr
bió á Steinfinnz-staoðom; ok es ecki manna frá hónom komet. Ásbiaorn
helgaðe land-nám sítt Þór, ok kallaðe Þórs-maork: hans son vas Ketill
enn Auðge, es átte Þórgerðe [825] Gollnis dóttor; þeirra baorn vóro
þau Helge ok Ásgerðr.5

 [826]7. Heriolfr, son Bárðar Baregs sonar, bróðer Hallgríms
 Svið­balca, bygðe fyrst Vestmanna-eyjar; ok bió í Herjolfs-dale fyr
 innan Ægis-dyrr; þar sem nú es hraun brunnet; hans son vas Ormr Aurge
 [827], es bió á Orms-staoðom  við hamar niðre, þar sem nú es bláset
 allt; ok átte einn allar Eyjarnar--þær liggja fyr Eyja-sande;10
 en áðr vas þar veiðe-staoð, ok engra manna vettr-seta. Ormr átte
 Þórgerðe, dóttor Oddz Kald-munnz; þeirra dótter Halldóra, es átte
 Eilífr Valla-Branz son.

4. 1. Ketill Hoengr hét ágætr maðr í Naumo-dale [828], son Þórkels
Naum-doela-iarls, ok Hrafnildar, dóttor Ketils15 Hoengs or Hrafnisto,
Hallbiarnar sonar Half-trollz. Ketill bió þá í Naumo-dale es Haralldr
konungr Hárfagre sende þá Hallvarð Harðfara, ok Sigtrygg Snarfara til
Þórolfs Kveld-Ulfs sonar frænda Ketils. Þá dró Ketill lið saman, ok
ætlaðe at veita Þórolfe; en Haraldr konungr fór et oefra of Eldo-eið,
ok feck ser skip í Naumo-dale,20 ok fór svá norðr í Álost á Sand-nes,
ok tók þar af lífe Þórolf [[282: v. 3.]] Kveldulfs son; ok fór þá
norðan et ytra; ok fann þá marga menn es til liðs ætloðo við Þórolf;
ok hnekðe konungr þeim þá. Lítlo síðarr fór Ketill Hoengr norðr í
Torgar, ok brende inne Hroerek [829] ok Hárek Hilderíðar sono es Þórolf
haofðo roegðan dauða-róge. Efter [830] þat fór Ketill til Íslannz með
Ingunne kono sína, ok sono5 þeirra. Hann kom skipe síno í Rangár-ós,
ok vas enn fyrsta vetr at Hrafns-toftom.

2. Ketill nam aoll laond miðle Þiórs-ár ok Markar-fliótz. Þar naómo
síðan marger gaofger menn í land-náme Ketils. Hann eignaðe [831]
(ser) einkanlega land miðle Rang-ár ok Hróars-loekjar, allt fyr10
norðan Reyðar-vaotn; ok bió at Hofe. Þá es Ketill hafðe foert flest
þing [832] sín til Hofs, varð Ingunn kona hans léttare, ok foedde
þar Hrafn, es síðan varð Laogsaogo-maðr [833]--því heiter þar nú
at Hrafns-toftom. Hoengr hafðe ok under ser laond aoll fyr austan
Rang-aó ena eystre [834], Vaz-fell til loekjar þess es fellr fyr
útan Breiða-bólstað,15 ok fyr ofan Þver-aó, allt nema Dufþax-hollt
ok Mýrena: þat gaf hann þeim manne es Dufþacr hét: hann vas ham-rammr
miok.

3. Helge hét annarr son Hoengs: hann átte Valdíse, Iólgeirs dóttor:
þeirra dótter vas Helga, es átte Oddbiaorn Aska-smiðr--við20 hann es
kent Oddbiarnar-leiðe. Baorn þeirra Oddbiarnar ok Helgo vóro (þau),
Hróalldr, Kolbeinn, ok Kolfinna, ok Ásvaor.

[[283: v. 3.]]

4. Stórolfr vas enn þriðe son Haongs: hans baorn vóro þau Ormr enn
Sterke, ok Oddkell [835], ok Hrafnhildr, es átte Gunnarr Baugs son:
þeirra son Hámundr, faðer Gunnars at Hlíðar-enda.

5. Vestarr hét enn fiórðe son Hoengs: hann átte Móeiðe; þeirra
dótter vas Ásný, es átte Ofeigr Gretter [836]. Þeirra baorn Ásmundr5
Skegg-lauss ok Ásbiaorn, ok Ásdís [837], móðer Valla-Brannz; ok Ásvaor,
móðer Helga ens Svarta; Æsa hét ein.

6. Herjolfr hét enn fimte son Hoengs, faðer Sumarliða, faoðor
Vetrliða Skálldz; þeir bioggo í Sumarliða-boe--þar heiter nú under
Breckom.--Vetrliða vaógo þeir Þangbrandr prestr ok Goð-leifr10 Ara
son af Reykja-hólom um níð.

[M*: Vétrliðe nídde Þangbrand; fyrer þat vá Þangbrandr hann at
torf-graofom; hann varðesk með torf-skera Goðleife Arasyne af
Reykja-nese; Þangbrandr lagðe hann með spióte. Um Goðleif orte
Lióðar-keptr drápo.] [838]15

7. Sæbiaorn [839] Goðe vas son Hrafns Hángs sonar, es átte Unne
Sigmundar dóttor: þeirra son vas Arngrímr. [840]



[[283: v. 3.]]


5. 1. Sigvatr enn Rauðe hét gaofogr maðr á Háloga-lande; hann
átte Rannveigo, dóttor Eyvindar Lamba, faoðor-systor Eyvindar
Skálda-spilless; hennar móðer vas Ingebiaorg, Hávarz dótter,
Griótgarz sonar Háleygja iarls.--Sigvatr fór til Íslannz [841], ok
nam land at ráðe Hoengs í hans land-náme, fyr vestan5 Markar-fliót,
Einhyrnings-maork fyr ofan Deilðar-aó; ok bió í Ból-stað.

2. Hans son vas Sigmundr, faðer Marðar Gígjo, es mestr haofðinge vas
á Rangár-vaollom um hans daga; ok þat vas hvert kallað loklaoso-þing
es hann kom eige til. Sigmundr féll við Sand-hóla-ferjo.--Þar10 es
haugr hans fyr austan Þiórs-aó. Rannveig vas dótter Sigmundar, es
átte Hámundr Gunnars son; þeirra son Gunnarr at Hlíðar-enda.

Sun Sighvatz vas Barekr, faðer Þórðar, faoðor Steina.

[S: (Sighvatr R ...) Lamba ok Sigríðar, es átt hafðe Þór-hrólfr15
Kveldulfs son. Rannveig vas syster Finnz ens Skiálga. Sighvatr fór
til Íslannz at fýsn sínni, ok nam ... Bólstað. Hans son Sigmundr,
f. Marðar Gigjo, ok Sigfúss í Hlíð, ok Lamba á Lamba-staoðom, ok
Rannveigar er átte Hám. Gunn. s.; ok Þórgerðar [842] [[284: v. 4.]] es
átte Onundr Bíldr í Floa. Annarr son Sighvatz var Barecr, ...]

6. 1. Iorundr Goðe, son Hrafns ens Heimska, bygðe fyr vestan Fliót, þar
sem nú heiter á Svertings-staoðom. Hann goerðe þar hof mikit. Biór einn
lá [843] ónumenn fyr austan5 Fliót, miðle Cross-ár ok Ioldo-steins:
um þat land fór Iorundr elde, ok lagðe til hofsens.

2. Iorundr feck Þórríðar, dóttor Þórbiarnar ens Gaulverska; ok vas
brúðkaup þeirra í Skarfa-nese at Flosa, es oll laond átte miðle
Þiórs-ár ok Eng-ár. Þeirra baorn vóro þau, Ulfr Orgoðe [844]; ok10
Þórunn, es átte Vígfúss í Hlíð; ok Valgarðr at Hofe: hans móðer vas
Þórlaug, dótter Hrafns Hoengs sonar: hann átte Unne, dóttor Marðar
Gígjo síðarr an Hrútr á Kams-nese.

3. Þórkell Bundin-fóte nam land at ráðe Hoengs um-hverfis Þrí-hyrning;
ok bió þar under fialleno. Hann vas han-rammr miok:15 hans baorn
vóro þau Baorkr Blátannar-skegg, faðer Starkaðar under Þríhyrninge;
ok Þórunn, es átte Ormr enn Sterke; ok Dagrún, móðer Bersa.

7. 1. Baugr hét maðr, fóst-bróðer Hoengs: (hann) fór til Íslannz, ok
vas enn fyrsta vettr á Baugs-staoðom; en20 annan með Hoenge.--Baugr
vas son Rauðs, Ceallacs sonar, Cearvals [[286: v. 4.]] sonar Íra
konungs.--Hann nam Fliótz-hlíð alla at ráðe Ketils (Hoengs) ofan um
Breiða-bólstað til mótz [845] við Hoeng; ok bió at Hlíðar-enda. Hans
syner vóro þeir Gunnarr ok Eyvindr, ok Steinn enn Snialle; ok Hilldr,
es átte Orn í Véli-gerðe [846].

2. Þeir Steinn enn Snialle; ok Sigmundr son Sigvatz Rauða,5 fóro
útan af Eyrom, ok kómo til Sandhóla-ferjo aller senn, Sigmundr ok
faoro-nautar hans, ok Steinn; ok vildo hvárer fyrr fara yfer aóna. Þeir
Sigmundr stokroðo [847] húskaorlom Steins, ok raóko þá frá skipeno:
þá kom Steinn at, ok hió Sigmund bana-hoegg.

Um víg þesse urðo Baugs-syner seker aller or Hlíðenne; fór10 Gunnarr
í Gunnars-holt; en Eyvindr under Fiaoll austr í Eyvindar-hóla; en
Sniall-Steinn [848] út í Sniallz-haofða. Þat líkaðe ílla Þórgerðe
dóttor Sigmundar, at faoðor-bane hennar fór út þangat; ok eggjaðe
Onund Bíld, bónda sínn, at hefna Sigmundar. Onundr fór með þriá tege
[849] manna í Sniallz-haofða ok bar þar eld at húsom. Sniall-Steinn15
geck út ok gafsk upp; þeir leiddo hann í haofðann, ok vaógo hann
þar. Efter víg þat mælte Gunnarr bróðer hans:--hann átte Hrafn-hilde
Stórolfs dóttor, systor Orms ens Sterka; Hámundr vas son þeirra. Þeir
vóro báðer afreks-menn um afl ok vænleik. [850]--Onundr varð sekr
um víg Sniall-Steins: hann sat með fiolmenne20 [[287: v. 4.]] tvá
vettr. Orn í Veli-gerðe, mágr Gunnars, hélt niósnom til Onundar. Efter
Iól enn þriðja vettr fór Gunnarr með þriá tege [851] manna at Onunde,
at til-vísan Arnar, (es) Onundr fór [852] frá leik með tolfta mann
til hrossa sínna. Þeir fundosk í Orrosto-dale; þar fell Onundr með
fiórða mann; en einn af Gunnare. Gunnarr vas í5 blárre kaópo. Hann
reið upp efter Holtom til Þiórs-ár; ok skamt frá aónne fell hann af
bake, ok vas oerendr af saórom.

En þá es syner Onundar vóxo upp, Sigmundr Cleyker ok Eilífr Auðge,
þá sótto þeir Maorð Gígjo frænda sínn at efter-mále. Maorðr sagðe þat
ó-haógt um sekjan mann. Þeir kvaóðo ser við Orn verst10 líka es þeim
sat nest. Maorðr lagðe þat til, at þeir skyldo fá Erne skóggangs-saok,
ok koma hónom svá or heraðe. Onundar-syner tóko beitinga-mál [853] á
hendr Erne; ok varð hann svá sekr, at Orn skylde falla óheilagr fyrer
Onundar-sonom, hver-vitna nema í Veli-gerðe, ok í aorskotz-helge við
land-eign sína. Onundar syner saóto iamnan15 um hann; en hann gætte
sín vel.

Þat vas einn tíma, at Orn rak naut or lande síno [854], þá kómo þeir
at hónom ok vaógo hann; ok hugðo menn at hann moende úheilagr fallet
hafa. Þórleifr Gneiste, bróðer Arnar, keypte at Þórmóðe Þióstars-syne,
at hann helgaðe Orn--Þórmóðr vas þá komenn út á Eyrom--,20 [[288:
v. 5.]] hann skaut þá skot svá langt af hand-boga, at fall Arnar varð
í aorskotz-helge hans. Þá mælto þeir Hámundr Gunnars son ok Þórleifr
efter Orn; en Maorðr veitte þann broeðrom. Þeir guldo eige fé; en
skyldo vesa héraðs-seker or Floa. Þá bað Maorðr til handa Eilífe
Þórkotlo Ketilbiarnar dóttor, ok fylgðe henne heiman5 Haofða-land
[855]; ok bió Eilífr þar; en til handa Sigmunde bað hann [856]
Arngunnar dóttor Þórsteins Dranga-karls, ok rézt hann austr í sveit
[857]. Þá gifte Maorðr (ok) Rannveigo systor sína Hámunde Gunnars
syne; ok fór hann þá at [858] bua at Hlíðar-enda: ok vóro þeirra
syner, Gunnarr at Hlíðar-enda, ok Híaortr ok Helge, ok Hafr,10 ok
Ormr Skógar-nef, es fell á Ormenom Langa með Óláfe konunge.

3. Hillder ok Hallgeirr, ok Liót syster þeirra, vóro Írsk [859]. Þau
fóro til Íslannz; ok naómo land miðle Fliótz ok Rang-ár, Eyja-sveit
alla upp til Þver-ár. Hilder bió í Hildes-ey: hann vas faðer Móeiðar at
Móeiðar-hvále. Hallgeirr bió í Hallgeirs-ey: hans15 dótter vas Mabil,
es átte Helge Hoengs son. En Liót bió á Liótar-staoðom. [860]

4. Dufþacr í Dufþacs-holte vas leysinge þeirra broeðra: hann
vas ham-ramr míok; ok svá vas Stórolfr Hoengs son--hann bió þá
at Hvále--Þá skilðe á um beitingar. Þat sá ofreskr maðr um nótt,20
[[290: v. 5.]] at biaorn mikill geck frá Hvále [861], en griðongr frá
Dufþacs-holte, ok fundosk á Stórolfs-velle, ok gengosk at reiðer;
ok mátte biaornenn meira. Um morgonenn vas þar dalr efter es þeir
haofðo fundezk, sem um være snuet iaorðinne, ok heiter þat [862]
nú Oldo-gróf. Báðer vóro þeir meidder, ok laógo í reckjo.5

5. Eilífr ok Biaorn broeðr fóro or Sogne til Íslannz: Eilífr nam Odda
enn lítla upp til Reyðar-vaz, ok til Víkings-loekjar: hann átte Helgo,
dóttor Onundar Bíllz. Þeirra son vas Eilífr enn Unge, es átte Oddnýjo,
dóttor Oddz ens Mióva: þeirra dótter vas Þóríðr, es átte Þórgeirr í
Odda: þeirra dótter vas Helga.10

6. Bíaorn bió í Svín-haga, ok nam land upp með Rang-aó; hans baorn vóro
þau Þórsteinn, faðer Gríms Holta-skalla; ok Hallveig, móðer Þórunnar,
móðor Goðrúnar, móðor Sæmundar [f. Brandz byscops].

7. Colr [863] hét maðr, son Óttars Ballar; hann nam land fyr
austan15 Reyðar-vatn ok Stota-loek, fyr vestan Rang-aó [864], ok
Trolla-skóg [865], til móðz við Þórstein Tiald-stoeðing; ok bió at
[866] Sand-gile. Hans son vas Egill, es sat fyre Gunnare Hámundar
syne hiá Cnafa-hólom; ok fell þar sialfr, ok Austmenn tveir, ok Are
hús-karl hans; en Hiaortr, bróðer Gunnars, or hans liðe.20

8. Syner Gunnars vóro þeir Grane ok Hamundr. Gunnarr barðesk við Otkel
or Kirkjo-boe við garð at Hofe; ok fell Otkell [[291: v. 5.]] þar
ók Skamcell. Geirr Goðe, ok Gizorr Hvíte, ok Ásgrímr Elliða-Gríms
son, ok Staorkoðr undan Þríhyrnige--son Bárðar Blá­skeggs, Þórkels
sonar Bundin-fóta, es átte Þóríðe Egils dóttor frá Sand-gile--þeir
fóro um leiðar-skeið; ok kómo um nótt með þriá tige [867] manna til
Hlíðar-enda; en Gunnarr vas fyrer með einn karl-mann5 full-tíða. Tveir
menn féllo or liðe Geirs; en sextán urðo sárer áðr Gunnarr féll.

9. Hrólfr hét maðr Rauð-skeggr; hann nam Holms-laond aoll, miðle
Fisk-ár ok Rang-ár; ok bió at Forse. Hans baorn vóro þau, Þórsteinn
Rauðnefr, es þar bió síðan; ok Þóra, móðer Þórkels10 Mána; ok Ása,
móðer Þórnýjar [868], móðor Þórgeirs at Liósa-vatne; ok Helga,
móðer Oddz frá Mió-synde: dótter Oddz vas Ásbiaorg [869], es átte
Þórsteinn Goðe, faðer Biarna ens Spaka, faoðor Skeggja, faoðor Márcuss
Laogsaogo-mannz [870].

10. Þórsteinn Rauðnefr vas blót-maðr mikill, ok blótaðe forsenn;15
ok skylde bera leifar allar á forsenn. Hann vas ok fram-sýnn
miok. Þórsteinn lét reka [871] sauð sínn or rétt tottogo hundroð;
en þá hlióp alle réttena þaðan af. En því vas sauðrenn svá margr,
at hann sá um haustom hverer feiger vóro; ok lét þá alla skera. En
et síðasta haust es hann lifðe, þá mælte hann í sauða-rétt: 'Skereð
ér nú20 sauðe þá es ér vileð; feigr em ek nú, eða allr sauðrenn ella,
nema [[292: v. 6.]] bæðe sé.' En þá nótt es Þórsteinn dó, rak sauðenn
allan út í forsenn, ok fórsk þar. Helge hét dótter hans [872], es
átte Helge Rogn Ketils son.

8. 1. Ulfr Gylðer hét herser ríkr í Norege á Þela-maork: hann bió
á Fifla-vaollom í Tinz-dale: hans5 son vas Ásgrímr, faðer þeirra
Þórsteins, ok Þórlaugar. Þórkatla hét móðer þeirra, es Hringja vas
kaolloð.

2. Haraldr konungr enn Hárfagre sende Þórorm [873] frænda sínn or
Þrumo af Ogðom, at heimta skatt af Ásgríme, sem konungr bauð hónom:
en hann galt eige; þvi at hann hafðe sent konunge lítlo10 áðr hest
Gauzkan, ok silfr mikit; ok sagðe þat giaof skyldo en eige giald;
þvi at hann hafðe aldre áðr skatt goldet. Aftr sende konungr féit;
ok vilde eige hafa.

Þórkatla, kona Ásgríms, foedde svein-barn. Ásgrímr bað út bera. Þræll
hvatte gref, sá es honom [874] skylde graof grafa; en15 sveinnenn vas
lagðr niðr á golf. Þá heyrðesk þeim aollom, sem sveinnenn kvæðe þetta:


     [875]Láte maog til móðor! mer es kalt á golfe;
    Hvar mone sveinn en soemre, an at síns faoðor aornom.
    Þarf eige iarn at eggja, né iarðar-men skerða;20
    Létteð lióto verke! lifa mun-ek enn með maonnom.


Síðan vas sveinnenn vatne ausenn, ok kallaðr Þórsteinn.

[[294: v. 6.]]

En es Þórormr kom annat sinn at heimta skatt, kvadde Ásgrímr þings;
ok spurðe boendr ef þeir vilde greiða konunge slíkan skatt sem beitz
vas. Þeir baóðo hann svara fyre sik; en vildo þó eige greiða. Þinget
vas við skóg; ok es þá varðe minzt, hlióp fram þræll Þórorms at
Ásgríme ok drap hann. Boendr draópo hann5 þegar. Þórsteinn vas þá
í hernaðe. Ok es hann spurðe víg faoðor síns, selðe hann iarðer
sínar til silfrs; ok biósk til Íslannz or Grenmare [876] fyr austan
Líðandis-nes. Ok áðr hann foere, brende Þórsteinn Þórorm í Þrumo inne,
ok hefnde faoðor síns.

3. Þórgeirr hét bróðer hans; hann vas þá tio vetra, es Þórormr10 lét
drepa faoðor þeirra. Hann fór til Íslannz með Þórsteine; ok Þórunn
móðor-syster þeirra, ok nam Þórunnar-halsa; ok bygðe þar síðan.

4. Þórsteinn kom í Rang-ár-ós, ok nam land at ráðe Flosa fyr ofan
Víkings-loek, ok út til mótz við Svínhaga-Biaorn, ok bió í15 Skarðe
eno eystra.

5. Um hans daga kom skip þat í Rangár-ós, es sótt mikil vas á; ok vilde
einge (taka) við þeim. En Þórsteinn fór efter þeim, ok goerðe þeim
tiald-búð þar sem nú heiter Tialda-staðer [877]; ok þiónaðe þeim þar
sialfr meðan þeir lifðo. En þeir dó aller.--Hann20 vas síðan kallaðr
Þórsteinn Tiald-stoeðingr--en sá þeirra es langst lifðe efter, fal
goll síft ok silfr ok gróf niðr, svá at þat hefer enge fundet síðan.

[[295: v. 7.]]

6. Þórsteinn átte fyrr Þóríðe Gunnars dóttor, Hámundar sonar. Þeirra
baorn, Gunnarr, Þórhallr, Iósteinn, Iorunn [878]. Síðan átte Þórsteinn
Þóríðe, dóttor Sigfúss [879] or Hlíð: þeirra baorn, Skegge, ok
Þórkatla, Rannveig, ok Arnþóra.

7. En Þórgeirr, bróðer Þórsteins, keypte Odda-land at Hrafne5
Hoengs syne, strander báðar, ok Varma-dal, ok Oddann allan miðle
Hróars-loekjar ok Rang-ár. Hann bió fyrstr í Odda, ok átte Þóríði,
dóttor Eilífs ens Unga: þeirra dótter Helga, es átte Svartr Ulfs son:
þeirra son Loðmundr í Odda, faðer Sigfúss prestz, faoðor Sæmundar
[ens Fróða].10

9. 1. Flose hét maðr, son Þórbiarnar ens Gaulverska. Hann drap þriá
sýslo-menn Harallz konungs ens Hárfagra; ok fór efter þat til Íslannz;
ok nam land fyr austan Rang-aó, alla Rangár-vaollo ena eystre: hans
dótter vas Ásný, móðer Þóríðar, es Valla-Brandr átte: son Valla-Brannz
vas Flose, faðer Kolbeins,15 faoðor Goðrúnar, es Sæmundr [enn Fróðe]
átte. Flose átte Goð­rúno, Þóris dóttor, Skegg-Brodda sonar.

2. Af því fór Loptr enn Gamle, systor-son Flosa, at blóta á Gaulom,
at Flosa vas ófritt í Norege. Flose enn Norroene átte Þórdíse ena
Miklo, dóttor Þórunnar ennar Auðgo, Ketils dóttor ens20 Einhenda:
þeirra dótter vas Ásný, es átte Þórgeirr.

3. Ketill enn Einhende hét maðr, son Auðunnar Þunn-cars; [[296:
v. 7.]] hann nam Rangár-vaollo alla [880] ena ýtre, fyr ofan
Loekjar-botna, en fyr austan Þiórs-aó; ok bió at Á. Hann átte
Ásleifo, Þórgils dóttor: þeirra son vas Auðunn, faðer Brynjolfs,
faoðor Bergþórs, faoðor Þórláks [f. Þorhallz, f. Þorláks [881]
byscops ens Helga].

4. Ketill Áurriðe, broeðrungr Ketils ens Einhenda, nam land et5 ýtra
með Þiórs-aó; ok bió á Vaollom enom iðrom [882]: hans son vas Helge
Hrogn, es Helgo átte, dóttor Þórsteins Rauðnefs [883]: þeirra son
vas Oddr Mióve, faðer Ásgerðar, es átte Þórsteinn Goðe; ok Oddnýjar
[884], es Eilífr enn Unge átte.

5. Ormr Auðge, son Ulfs ens Hvassa, nam land með Rang-aó at10 ráðe
Ketils ens Einhenda. Hann bió í Húsa-garðe, ok Áskell, son hans,
efter hann; en Brandr son hans [885] reiste fyrst boe á Vaollom.--Frá
hónom ero Vallverjar komner.

6. Þórsteinn Lunan [886] hét maðr noroenn ok far-maðr mikill. Hónom
vas þat spáð, at hann moende á því lande deyja, es þá vas enn
ecki15 bygt. Þórsteinn fór til Íslannz í elle sinne með Þórgisle
syne sínom. Þeir naómo enn oefra hlut Þiórsár-holta; ok bioggo í
Lunans-holte [887]; ok þar es Þórsteinn heygðr. Dótter Þórgils vas
Ásleif, es átte Ketill enn Einhende: syner þeirra vóro þeir Auðunn,
es áðr vas nefndr; ok Eilífr, faðer Þórgeirs, faoðor Skeggja, faoðor20
[[298: v. 8.]] Hialta í Þiórsár-dale. Hann vas faðer Iórunnar, móðor
Goðrúnar, móðor Einars, faoðor Magnús byscops.

7. Gunnsteinn Berserkja-bane, son Bolverks Blindinga-trióno, drap tvá
berserke; ok hafðe annarr þeirra áðr drepet Griótgarð Háleygja-iarl í
Solva fyr innan Agða-nes. Gunnsteinn vas síðan5 skotenn aoro Finnskre
or skóge á skipe síno norðr í Hefne. Son Gunnsteins vas Þórgeirr,
es átte Þórunne ena Auðgo, móðor Ketils Einhenda: þeirra dótter vas
Þórdís en Mikla.

8. Raðormr ok Iólgeirr broeðr kómo vestan um haf til Íslannz. Þeir
naómo land miðle Þiórs-ár ok Rang-ár. Raðormr eignaðesk10 land fyr
austan Rauða-loek; ok bió í Vetleifs-holte [888]: hans dótter vas
Arnbiaorg, es átte Svertingr Hiorleifs son: þeirra baorn vóro þau,
Grímr Laogsaogo-maðr, ok Iórunn. Síðarr átte Arnbiaorgo Gnúpr
Molda-Gnúps son: ok vóro þeirra baorn, Hallsteinn á Hialla; ok
Rannveig, móðer Skafta laogsaogo-mannz [889]; ok Geirný,15 móðer
Skalld-Hrafns.

9. Iólgeirr eignaðesk land fyr útan Rauða-loek, ok til
Steins-loekjar. Hann bió á Iólgeirs-staoðom.

10. Ásgeirr Hnockan, son Dufþacs, Dufnials sonar, Cearvals sonar
Íra konungs: hann nam land míðle Steins-loekjar ok Þiórs-ár;20 ok
bió í Áskels-haofða. Hans son vas Ásmundr, faðer Ásgauz, [[299:
v. 8.]] faoðor Skeggja, faoðor Þórvallz, faoðor Þórlaugar, móðor
Þórgerðar, móðor Ioans byscops [ens Helga].

11. Þórkell Þialfe, fóst-bróðer Raðorms, eignaðesk laond aoll á
miðle Rang-ár ok Þiórs-ár; ok bió í Háfe. Hann átte Þórunne Eyversko:
þeirra dótter Þórdís, móðer Skeggja, faoðor Þórvallz5 í Áse.

12. Þaðan hafðe Hialte, mágr hans, reiðskióta til Alþingis, ok þeir
tolf, þá es hann vas út komenn með Cristne. En einge treystesk annarra,
fyrer ofríke Rúnolfs Ulfs sonar, es sekðan hafðe Hialta um goð-gaó.10

Nú ero ritaðer þeir menn, es laond hafa þeget ok numet í land-náme
Ketils Hoengs.

10. 1. Loptr, son Orms Fróða sonar, fór af Gaulom til Íslannz ungr
at aldre; ok nam land fyr útan Þiórs-aó, miðle Rauð-ár ok Þiórs-ár
[890], ok upp til Skúfs-loekjar; ok Breiða-mýre15 ena eystre upp
til Súlo-hollz; ok bió í Gaulverja-boe; ok Oddný, móðer hans, dótter
Þórbiarnar ens Gaulverska.

2. Loptr fór útan et þriðja hvert sumer fyrer haond þeirra Flosa
beggja, móðor-bróðor síns, at blóta at hofe því es Þórbiaorn,
móðor-faðer [891] hans, hafðe þar varð-veitt á Gaulom.20

3. Þórbiaorn vas ríkr herser í Norege í Fiala-fylke: hann vas [[300:
v. 9.]] Ormars son: hann átte Hillde, Ulfars dóttor ok Þórunnar
Groe-ningja-riúpo.

4. Vémundr enn Gamle, son Víkings Skáneyjar-skelmis, mágr Biarnar
Buno, vas herser ríkr: hans son vas Fróðe, faðer Orms, faoðor Loptz
ens Gamla.--Frá hónom [892] es mart stór-menne komet5 [Þorlákr enn
Helge, Brandr bp, ok Póll bp].

5. Þórviðr, son [893] Ulfars, bróðer Hildar, fór af Vors til
Íslannz. En Loftr frænde hans gaf hónom land á Breiða-mýre; ok bió
hann í Vorsa-boe. Hans baorn vóro þau Hrafn; ok Hallveig, es átte
Ozorr enn Hvíte: þeirra son vas Þórgrímr Campe.10

6. Þórarenn hét maðr, son Þórkels or Alviðro, Hallbiarnar sonar
Haorða-kappa. Hann kom skipe síno í Þiórs-ár-ós; ok hafðe þiórs-haofuð
á fram-stafne; ok es þar aóen við kennd. Þórarenn nam land fyr ofan
Skúfs-loek til Rauð-ár, ofan með Þiórs-aó: hans dótter vas Heimlaug,
es Loptr geck at eiga sextoegr [894].15

11. 1. Haraldr Goll-skeggr hét konungr í Sogne: hann átte Solvoro [895]
dóttor Hundolfs iarls, systor Atla iarls ens Mióva: þeirra doettr vóro
þær Þóra, es átte Halfdan Svarte Upplendinga konungr, ok Þórríðr, es
átte Ketill Hello-flage: Haraldr Unge vas son þeirra Halfdanar ok Þóro;
hónom20 gaf Haralldr konungr Goll-skeggr nafn sítt ok ríke. Haralldr
konungr andaðesk fyrst þeirra; en þá Þóra; en Haralldr Unge [[301:
v. 9.]] síðast. Þá bar ríket under Halfdan konung; en hann sette
yfer þat Atla iarl enn Mióva. Síðan feck Halfdan konungr Ragnilldar,
dóttor Sigurðar Hiartar; ok vas þeirra son Haralldr enn Hárfagre.

2. Þá es Haralldr konungr geck til ríkes í Norege, ok hann mægðesk
við Hákon iarl Griótgarz son, feck hann Sygna-fylke5 Hákone iarle
mage sínom, es [896] konungr fór í Vík austr; en Atle iarl vilde
eige af láta ríkeno, fyr an hann fynde Haralld konung. Iarlarner
þrætto [897] þetta með kappe, ok drógo her saman. Þeir fundosk á
Fiolom í Stafa-ness-váge, ok baorðosk þar; ok fell Hákon iarl, en
Atle varð sárr, ok vas hann fluttr í Atla-ey [898], ok dó þar ór10
saórom. [899] En efter þat hélt Hásteinn son hans ríkeno, þar til es
Haralldr konungr ok Sigurðr iarl drógo her at hónom.

Hásteinn tók þá undan, ok réð til Íslannz-ferðar. Hann átte Þóro, Olvés
dóttor: Olvér ok Atle vóro syner þeirra. Hásteinn skaut set-stockom fyr
borð í hafe at fornom sið;--þeir kvómo á15 Stál-fiaoro [900] ok vóro
hafder fyre dyre-branda á Stocks-eyre--en Hásteinn kom í Hásteins-sund
fyr austan Stocks-eyre; ok braut þar. Hann nam land miðle Rauð-ár ok
Olvus-ár upp til Fyllar-loekjar [901]; ok Breiða-mýre alla upp at
Holtom. Hann bió á Stocks-eyre, ok Atle [902] son hans efter hann,
áðr hann foerðe sik í Traðar-holt.20

Olvér hét annarr son Hásteins. Hann bió [903] at Stiornu-steinom:
[[301, 303: v. 9.]] hann andaðesk barn-lauss; en Atle tók efter
hann arf allan. Leysinge Olvés vas Brattr es bió í Brattz-holte;
en Leiðolfr á Leiðolfs-staoðom. Atle vas faðer Þórðar Dofna, faoðor
Þórgils Errobeins-stiúps [904].

[S: (Breiða-mýre alla upp at Holtom), ok bió á Stiorno-steinom,5
ok svá Olvér son hans efter hann.--Þar heita nú Olvés-staðer
[905]. Olvér hafðe land-nám allt fyr útan Gríms-aó, Stocks-eyre ok
Ás­gautz-staðe; en Atle átte allt miðle Gríms-ár ok Rauð-ár; hann
bió í Traðar-holte. Olvér andaðesk barn-lauss, Atle tók efter hann
land ok lausa-fé; hans leysinge var Brattr, etc.]10

3. Hallsteinn hét maðr, es fór or Sogne til Íslannz, mágr Hásteins:
hónom gaf hann (enn) ýtra hlut Eyrar-backa: hann bió á Fram-nese: hans
son vas Þórsteinn, faðer Arngríms, es vegenn vas at fauska-grefte:
hans son vas Þórbiaorn á Fram-nese.

4. Þórer, son Ása hersiss, Ingiallz sonar, Hróallz sonar [906], fór
til15 Íslannz, ok nam Kall-nesinga-hrepp allan upp frá Fyllar-loek
[907]; ok bió at Sel-forse: hans son vas Tyrfingr [908], faðer Þóríðar,
móðor Tyrfings, faoðor Þórbiarnar prestz, ok Hámundar p(restz)
í Goð-daolom.

5. Hroðgeirr enn Spake ok Oddgeirr bróðer hans vóro Vestmenn [909],20
es þeir Finnr enn Auðge ok Hafnar-Ormr keypto [910] braut or land-náme
síno. Þeir naómo Hraungerðinga-hrepp; ok bió Oddgeirr [[304: v. 10.]] í
Oddgeirs-hólom: hans son vas Þórsteinn OExna-broddr, faðer Hroðgeirs,
faoðor Augurs í Camba-kisto: en dótter Hroð-geirs ens Spaka vas
Gunnvor, es átte Kolgrímr enn Gamle--þaðan ero Kvistlingar komner
[911].

6. Onundr Bíldr, es fyrr vas geteð, nam land fyr austan Hróars-loek,5
ok bió í Onundar-holte. Frá hónom es mart stórmenne komet [912],
sem fyrr es getið [913].

12. 1. Ozorr enn Hvíte hét maðr, son Þórleifs or Sogne. Ozorr vá víg í
véom á Upplaondom, þá es hann vas í bruðfaor með Sigorðe Hrísa [914]:
fyrer þat varð hann land-floemðr til10 Íslannz; ok nam fyrst aoll
Holta-laond, miðle Þiórs-ár ok Hrauns-loekjar. Þá vas hann siautián
[915] vetra es hann vá víget. Hann feck Hallveigar Þórviðar dóttor:
þeirra son vas Þórgrímr Campe, faðer Ozorar, faoðor Þórbiarnar,
faoðor Þórarens, faoðor Gríms Tófo [916] sonar.15

2. Ozorr bió í Campa-holte. Hans leysinge vas Baoðvarr, es bió at
[917] Baoðvars-toftom við Víðe-skóg; hónom gaf Ozorr hlut í skógenom;
ok skilðe ser efter hann barn-lausan. Orn at Vélu-gerðe [918],
es fyrr es geteð, stefnde Baoðvare um sauða-taoko. Því handsalaðe
Baoðvarr Atla Hásteins syne fé sítt; en hann únýtte20 mál [919]
fyrer Erne. Ozorr andaðesk þá es Þórgrímr vas ungr [920]. Þá [[305:
v. 10.]] tók Hrafn Þórviðar son við fiár-varð-veizlo Þórgríms. Efter
andlát Baoðvars talðe Hrafn til Víðe-skógs [921], ok bannaðe Atla;
en Atle þóttesk eiga. Þeir Atle fiórer fóro efter viðe; Leiðolfr
fór með hónom; smala-maðr sagðe Hrafne þat; en hann reið efter þeim
[922] með tionda [923] mann. Þeir fundosk í Orrosto-dale, ok baorðosk
þar.5 Þar [924] fello húskarlar Hrafns fiórer; en sialfr hann varð
sárr miok. Einn fell Atla húskarl; en hann varð sárr bana-saórom,
ok reið heim. Onundr Bildr skilðe þá.

Þórðr Domne [925], son Atla, vas þá nio vetra; en þá vas hann fimtán
vetra, es Hrafn reið til skips í Einars-haofn. Hann reið heim um10
nótt, ok vas í blárre kaópo. Þórðr sat fyrer hónom við Hauga-vað skamt
frá Traðar-holte, ok vá hann þar með spióte--þar es Hrafns-haugr
fyr austan gaoto; en fyr vestan Hásteins-haugr, ok Olvés-haugr,
ok Atla-haugr [926]. Vígen fellosk í faðma. Þórðr varð frægr af
þesso. Hann feck þá Þórunnar dóttor Ásgeirs Austmanna-skelmis;15 es
drap skips-haofn [927] Austmanna í Gríms-ár-óse, fyre rán þat es hann
vas rændr í Norege.

Þórðr hafðe þá tvá vettr [928] ok tottogo, es hann keypte skip í
Knarrar-sunde, ok vilde heimta arf sínn. Þá fal hann fé mikit; því
vilde Þórunn eige fara, ok tók hon við bue í Traðar-holte [929].20
Þórgils, son Þórðar vas þá tve-vetr. Skip Þórðar hvarf, ok spurðesk
ecke til. Vetre síðarr kom Þórgrímr Erro-beinn [930] til ráða með
[[306: v. 10.]] Þórunne. Hann vas son Þórmóðar, ok Þóríðar Ketilbiarnar
dóttor. Hann feck Þórunnar, ok vas þeirra son Hæringr.

3. Óláfr Tvennum-brúne [931] hét maðr; hann fór af Lofot
til Íslannz. Hann nam Skeið aoll miðle Þiórs-ár ok [932]
Sand-loekjar. (Hann vas hamramr [933] miok.) Óláfr bió á
Óláfs-vaollom.--Hann liggr5 í Brúna-hauge under Vaorðo-felle. Óláfr
át(te Áshilde, ok vas þeirra) son Helge Trauste; ok Þórer Drífa, faðer
Þórkels Gollcars, faoðor Orms, faoðor Helgo, móðor Oddz (Hallvarz
sonar. Vaðe) vas enn þriðe son Óláfs, faðer Gerðar.

4. Þórgrímr Erro-beinn [934] lagðe hug á As-hilde, síðan Óláfr
(vas10 dauðr; en Helge T)rauste vandaðe um. Hann sat fyrer Þórgríme
við gatna-mót fyr neðan Áshildar-mýre. Helge bað hann láta af
kvaómom. Þórgrímr kvazk eige hafa barna-skap. Þeir baorðosk, ok fell
Þórgrímr. Áshildr spurðe hvar Helge hefðe veret. Hann kvað víso:15


    Var-ek þar er fell til Fyllar ...


Áshildr kvað hann hafa hoegget ser haofoðs-bana. Helge tók ser, far
í Einars-haofn. Hæringr, son Þórgríms, vas þá sextán vettra. Hann
reið í Haofða, at finna Teit Gizorar son með þriðja mann [935]. Þeir
Teitr riðo fimtán, at banna Helga far. Þeir Helge moettosk í20 [[308:
v. 11.]] Merkr-hraune [936] upp frá Maork (við) Helga-hvál. Þeir Helge
vóro átta saman, komner af Eyrom [937]. Þar fell Helge, ok maðr með
hónom; ok einn af (þeim) Teite. Í faðma fellosk víg þau. Sonr Helga
vas Sigurðr enn Land-verske, ok Skefill enn Hauk-doelske, faðer Helga
Dyrs, es barðesk við Sigurð son Liótz Laongo-baks í5 OExar-ár-holme
[938] á Alþinge. Um þat orte Helge þetta:


    Band er á hoegre hende ...


Hrafn vas annarr son Skefils, faðer Gríms, faoðor Ásgeirs, faoðor
Helga.

5. Þróndr Miok-siglande, Biarnar son, bróðer Eyvindar Aust­mannz,10
es fyrr vas geteð: hann vas í Hafrs-firðe á mót Harallde konunge, ok
varð síðan land-flótte til Íslannz síð land-náma-tíðar. Hann nam land
miðle Þiórs-ár ok Lax-ár, ok upp til Kalf-ár, ok til Sand-loekjar: hann
bió í Þróndar-holte. Hans dótter vas Helga, es Þórmóðr Skafte átte.15

13. 1. Olver Barna-karl hét maðr ágætr í Norege. Hann vas víkingr
mikell. Hann lét eige henda baorn á spiótz-oddom, sem þá vas víkinga
siðr--því vas hann Barna-karl kallaðr. Hans syner vóro þeir Steinolfr,
faðer Uno [939], es átte Þórbiaorn Laxa-karl; ok Einarr, faðer Ófeigs
Grettis, ok Óleifs20 Breiðs, faoðor Þórmóðar Skafta. Steinmóðr vas enn
þriðe son [[309: v. 11.]] Olvés, faðer Conals, faoðor Aldísar ennar
Barreysko, es Oleifr [940] Feilan átte. Son Conals vas Steinmóðr,
faðer Halldóro es átte Eilífr, son Ketils ens Einhenda.

2. Þeir frændr, Úfeigr Grettir ok Þórmóðr Skafte, fóro til Íslannz,
ok vóro enn fyrsta vettr með Þórbirne Laxa-karle, máge5 sínom. En um
váret gaf hann þeim Gnúp-verja-hrepp, Úfeige enn ýtra hlut á miðle
Þver-ár ok Kalf-ár; ok bió á Úfeigs-staoðom hiá Steins-holte. En
Þórmóðe gaf hann enn eystra hlut; ok bió hann í Skafta-holte. Doettr
Þórmóðar vóro þær, Þórvaor, móðer Þóroddz Goða, faoðor Skafta [941];
ok Þórvé, móðer Þórsteins Goða,10 faoðor [942] Biarna ens Spaka.

Úfeigr fell fyrer Þórbirne Iarla-kappa í Grettis-geil hiá Hæle. Dótter
Úfeigs vas Aldís, móðer Valla-Branz.

3. Þórbiaorn Laxa-karl nam Þiórs-ár-dal allan, ok Gnúp-verja-hrepp
allan ofan til Kalf-ár; ok bió enn fyrsta vetr at Mið-húsom.15 Hann
hafðe þriár vetr-setor áðr hann kom í Haga. Þar bió hann til dauða-dags
[943]. Hans syner vóro þeir, Otkell í Þiórs-ár-dale; ok Þórgils, faðer
Þórkotlo; ok Þórkell Trandill [944], faðer Gauks í Staong; Otkatla vas
móðer Þórkotlo, móðor Þórvallz, faoðor Dollo, móðor Gizorar byscops.20

4. Brondolfr [945] ok Márr, Naddoz syner ok Iórunnar, dóttor Olvés
[[310: v. 11.]] Barna-karls, kómo til Íslannz snemma lannz-bygðar. Þeir
naómo Hruna-manna-hrepp, svá sem vatn-faoll deila þannveg. Brondolfr
[946] bió at Berg-hyl: hans syner vóro þeir, Þórleifr, faðer Brondolfs,
faoðor Þórkels Skota-Collz, faoðor Þórarens, faoðor Hallz í Hauka-dale,
ok Þórláks, faoðor Rúnolfs, faoðor Þórláks byscops. Márr5 bió á
Márs-aoæðom: hans son vas Beiner, faðer Colgrímo, móðor Skeggja,
faoðor Hialta.

5. Þórbiaorn Iarla-kappe hét maðr Noroenn. Hann fór af Ork­neyjom til
Íslannz. Hann keypte land í Hruna-manna-hrepp at Máve Naddotz syne
[947], allt fyr neðan Sels-loek á miðle Lax-á [948]. Hann10 bió at
[949] Hólom. Hans syner vóro þeir Solmundr, faðer Brenno-Cára; ok
Þórmóðr, faðer Finno, es átte Þórormr í Karla-firðe: þeirra doettr
Alfgerðr, móðer Gestz [f. Valgerðar, m. Þorleifs Beis­kallda]....

6. Þórbrandr, son Þórbiarnar ens Oarga, ok Ásbrandr son hans,15 kómo
til Íslannz síð lannáma-tíðar; ok vísaðe Ketilbiaorn þeim til land-náms
fyr ofan Múla þann es framm gengr hiá Stacks-aó, ok til Kallda-kvíslar;
ok bioggo í Hauka-dale.

Þeim þótte land of lítið; es Tunga en vestre [950] vas þá bygð. Þá
ióko þeir land-nám sítt, ok naómo enn oefra hlut Hruna-manna-hrepps,20
sión-hending or Múla í Ingiallz-gnúp, fyr ofan Gyldar-haga. [[312:
v. 12.]] Baorn Ásbranz vóro þau Vébrandr ok Arngerðr. Vébrandr vas
faðer Oddlaugar [951], es átte Svertingr Rúnolfs son.

14. 1. Ketilbiorn hét maðr ágætr í Naumu-dale: hann vas Ketils son,
ok Æso, dóttor Hákonar iarls Griót-garz sonar. Hann átte Helgo, dóttor
Þórðar Skeggja. Ketilbiaorn5 fór til Íslannz þá es landet vas víða bygt
með sió; hann hafðe skip þat es Elliðe hét. Hann kom í Elliða-ár-ós
fyr neðan Heiðe. Hann vas enn fyrsta vetr með Þórðe Skeggja máge sínom.

2. En um váret fór hann upp um heiðe at leita ser lannz-kosta.--Svá
seger Teitr [952]. Þeir haofðo nátt-ból, ok goerðo ser skála þar
sem10 nú heiter Skála-brecka í Blá-skógom. En es þeir fóro þaðan, kómo
þeir at aó þeirre es þeir kaolloðo OExar-aó, þvi at þeir týndo þar í
oexe sínne. Þeir aótto dvaol under fiallz-múla þeim es þeir kaolloðo
Reyðar-múla: þar laógo þeim efter á-reyðar þær es þeir tóko or aónne.15

[Sturl. S. vii. 12: En es þeir vóro þaðan skamt farner, þá kómo þeir á
ár-ís, ok hioggo þar á vaok, ok felldo í oexe sína, ok kaolloðo hána
af því OExar-aó.--Sú aó vas síðan veitt í Almanna-giaó, ok fellr nú
efter Þing-velle.--Þá fóro þeir þar til es nú es kallaðr Reyðar-múle:
þar urðo þeim efter reyðar þær es þeir fóro með,--ok20 kaolloðo þar
af því Reyðar-múla.]

[[313: v. 12.]]

3. Ketilbiaorn nam Gríms-nes allt upp frá Haoscullz-loek, ok Laugar-dal
allan, ok alla Byscops-tungo, upp til Stocks-ár; ok bió at Mos-felle.

Baorn þeirra vóro þau, Teitr, ok Þórmóðr, Þórleifr, ok Ketill;
Þórkatla, ok Oddleif [953], Þórgerðr, Þóríðr. Enn vas son Ketilbiarnar5
laun-getinn Skæringr.

4. Ketilbiaorn vas svá auðigr at lausa-fé, at hann bauð sonom sínom at
slá þver-tré af silfre í hofet, þat es þeir léto goera. Þeir vildo þat
eige. Þá ók hann silfret upp á fiallet, á tveimr [954] yxnom, ok Hake
þræll hans, ok Bót ambótt hans. Þau faólo féit, svá at eige10 hefer
fundezk síðan. Hann drap Haka í Haka-skarðe; en Bót í Bótar-skarðe.

5. Teitr átte Álofo, dóttor Baoðvars af Vors, Víkinga-Kára sonar:
þeirra son vas Gizorr Hvíte, faðer Ísleifs byscops, faoðor Gizorar
byscops. Annarr son Teitz (vas) Ketilbiaorn, faðer Colz [955],
faoðor15 Þórkels, faoðor Cols Vík-verja byscops.--Mart stór-menne es
frá Ketilbirne komet.

6. Eyfroeðr enn Gamle nam Tungo'-ena-eystre á miðle Kalda-kvíslar
ok Hvít-ár; ok bió í Tungo. Með hónom kom út Drumb-Oddr es bió á
Drumb-Oddz-staoðom.20

7. Ásgeirr hét maðr, Ulfs son: hónom gaf Ketilbiaorn Þórgerðe dóttor
sína. Henne fylgðo heiman Hlíðar-laond aoll fyr ofan Hagagarð. [[314:
v. 12.]] Hann bió í Hlíð enne ýtre. Þeirra son vas Geirr Goðe; ok
Þórgeirr, faðer Bárðar at Mos-felle.

8. Eilífr Auðge, son Onundar Bíllz, feck Þórkaotlo Ketilbiarnar dóttor;
ok fylgðo henne heiman Haofða-laond; þar bioggo þau. Þeirra son vas
Þórer, faðer Þórarens Sælings.5

15. 1. Veþormr, son Vémundar ens Gamla, vas herser ríkr. Hann stoeck
fyre Haralde konunge austr á Iamta-land, ok rudde þar marker til
bygða. Holmfastr hét son hans; en Grímr systor-son hans. Þeir vóro í
vestr-víking, ok draópo þar í Suðr-eyjom Ásbiaorn iarl Skerja-blesa;
ok tóko þar10 at her-fange Álofo kono hans; ok Arneiðe, dóttor hans,
ok hlaut Holmfastr hána; ok feck hána faoðor sínom [956], ok lét
vesa ambótt. Grímr feck Álofar, dóttor Þórðar Vagg-agða, es iarlenn
hafðe átta.

Grímr fór til Íslannz; ok nam Gríms-nes allt upp til Svína-vatz;15
ok bió í Ondorðo-nese fióra vettr; en síðan at Búr-felle. Hans son
vas Þórgils, es átte Æso, dóttor Gestz Oddleifs [957] sonar; þeirra
syner vóro þeir Þórarenn at Búr-felle, ok Iorundr í Miðenge.

2. Hallkell, bróðer Ketilbiarnar sam-moeðre, hann fór til Íslannz,
ok vas með Ketilbirne enn fyrsta vetr. Ketilbiaorn bauð at gefa20
hónom land. Hónom þótte lítil-mannligt, at þiggja land at hónom; [[316:
v. 13.]] ok skoraðe á Grim til landa, eða holm-gaongo ella. Grímr geck
á holm við Hallkel, under Hallkels-hólom, ok fell þar; en Hallkell
bió síðan at Hólom. Hans syner vóro þeir Otkell, es Gunnarr Hámundar
son vá; ok Oddr at Kiðja-berge, faðer Hallbiarnar, es vegenn vas við
Hallbiarnar-vaorðor; ok Hallkell, faðer Hallvarz,5 faoðor Þórsteins,
es Einarr Hialtlendingr vá: son Hallkels Oddz sonar vas Biarne,
faðer Hallz, faoðor Orms [f. Bárðar, f. Valgerðar, m. Halldóru,
er Magnús byscop Gizorar-son átte].

Nú es komet at land-náme Ingolfs; en þeir menn es nú ero talðer,
hafa bygt í hans land-náme [958].10

16. 1. Þórgrímr Bíldr, bróðer Onundar Bílz sam-moeðre við hann,
vas son Ulfs frá Hóle. Hann nam aoll land fyr ofan Þver-aó, ok bygðe
at Bílz-fialle.

2. Steinroeðr, Mel-patrex son gaofugs mannz af Írlande,--hann
vas leysinge Þórgríms Bílz.--Hann átte dóttor Þórgríms, ok
vas15 allra manna vænstr. Hann nam aoll Vatz-laond; ok bió á
Stein­roeðar-staoðom. Hans son vas Þórmóðr, faðer Cars, faoðor Þórmoz,
faoðor Branz, faoðor Þóres, faoðor Branz á Þingvelle [959].

3. Hrolleifr, son Einars [960], sonar Olvés Barna-karls, kom í
Leiro-vág, þá es bygt vas allt með sió. Hann nam laond til mótz við20
Steinroeð, aoll fyr útan OExar-aó, es fellr um Þing-vaoll; ok bió í
[[317: v. 13.]] Heiða-boe nockora vettr. Þá skoraðe hann á Eyvind í
Kvígo-vaógom til holm-gaongo eða land-saolo; en Eyvindr kaus heldr
at þeir keypte laondom. Eyvindr bió nockora vettr síðan í Heiða-boe;
ok fór síðan á Rosm-hvala-nes til Boeiar-skerja. En Hrolleifr bió
síðan í Kvígo-vaógom; ok es þar heygðr. Hans son vas Svertingr,5
faðer Gríms Laogsaogo-mannz at Mosfelle.

4. Ormr [961] enn Gamle, son Eyvindar iarls, Arnmóðs sonar iarls,
Nereiðs sonar iarls ens Sínka [962]: Ormr nam land á miðle Varm-ár ok
Þver-ár, um Ingolfs-fell allt; ok bió í Hvamme. Hann átte Þórunne,
dóttor Ketils Kiol-fara, þess es Fingalcnet barðe í hel:10 hon vas
afa-syster Gríms ens Háleyska. Þeirra son vas Ormr enn Gamle, faðer
Darra, faoðor Arnar.--Eyvindr iarl vas með Kiotva Auðga mót Haralde
konunge í Hafrs-firðe [963].

5. Alfr enn Egðske [964] stock fyrer Haralde konunge enom Hárfagra af
Ogðom or Norege. Hann fór til Íslannz, ok kom skipe síno í15 þann ós,
es við hann es kendr; ok Alfs-óss heiter. Hann nam aoll laond fyr
útan Varm-aó; ok bió at Gnúpom.

6. Þórgrímr Grímolfsson, bróðer hans, kom út með hónom, sá es
arf tók efter hann; þvi at Alfr átte ecki barn. Son Þórgríms vas
Eyvindr, faðer Þóroddz Goða, faoðor Skafta. Ozorr vas ok son20
[[318: v. 17.]] Eyvindar, es átte Bero, dóttor Egils, Skalla-Gríms
sonar. Móðer Þórgríms vas Cormlod, dótter Cearvals Íra-konungs.

7. Þórer Haust-myrkr nam Sel-vág ok Crysu-vík; en Heggr, son hans,
bió at Váge; en Baoðmóðr, annarr son hans, vas faðer Þórarens,
faoðor Súganda, faoðor Þórvarðar, faoðor Þórhildar, móðor5 Sigurðar,
Þórgríms sonar.

8. Molda-Gnúps syner bygðo Grinda-vík, sem fyrr es ritið [965].

9. Steinuðr en Gamla, frænd-kona Ingolfs, fór til Íslannz, ok vas
með hónom enn fyrsta vetr. Hann bauð at gefa henne Rosmhvala-nes allt
fyr útan Hvassa-hraun; enn hon gaf fyrer heklo fleckótta10 Enska, ok
vilde kaup kalla.--Henne þótte þat ú-hættara við rift-ingom. Steinunne
hafðe átta Herlaugr, bróðer Skalla-Gríms: þeirra syner [966] vóro,
Niall, ok Arnórr.

10. Eyvindr hét frænde ok fóstre Steinunnar; hónom gaf hon land miðle
Kvígo-vága-biarga ok Hvassa-hrauns. Hans son vas15 Erlingr [967], faðer
Þórarens, faoðor Sigvatz [968], faoðor Þóraorno, móðor Þórbiarnar,
Arnþiófs-sonar í Crysu-vík; ok Álofar [969], móðor Finnz Laog(sægo)
mannz [ok Freygerðar, móðor Loptz, faoðor Goðlaugs smiðs].

11. Heriolfr, sá es fyrer vas frá sagt, vas frænde Ingolfs ok
fóst-bróðer.20 Af því gaf Ingolfr hónom land miðle, Reykja-ness ok
Vágs. Hans son vas Bárðr, faðer Herjolfs, þess es fór til Groenalannz,
[[320: v. 15.]] ok kom í hafgerðingar. Á skipe hans vas Suðreyskr maðr,
sá es orte Hafgerðinga-draópo. Þar es þetta upphaf:


    Aller hlýðe osso fulle amra fialla dvalens hallar.


12. Ásbiaorn hét maðr, Ozorar son, bróðor-son Ingolfs; hann nam
land miðle Hrauns-holtz-loekjar ok Hvassa-hrauns, Alfta-nes5 allt;
ok bió á Skúla-staoðom. Hans son vas Egill, faðer Ozorar, faoðor
Þórarens, faoðor Óláfs, faoðor Sveinbiarnar [faoðor Ásmundar,
faoðor Sveinbiarnar, faoðor Styrkárs, faoðor Hafr-Biarnar [970],
faoðor þeirra Þórsteins, ok Gizoror í Seltiarnar-nese].

17. 1. Nu es yfer faret um land-naóm þau er veret hafa á10
Íslande. [Efter því sem fróðer menn hafa skrifat. Fyrst Are prestr
enn Fróðe Þórgils son; ok Kolskeggr enn Vitre.

En þessa bók ritaða-ek [971] Haukr Ellinz sun efter þeirre bók sem
ritað hafði Herra Sturla Logmaðr, hinn fróðasti maðr: ok efter þeirri
bók annarri, er ritað hafðe Styrmir hinn Fróði; ok hafða-ek15 þat
or hvárri sem framarr greindi. En mikill þori var þat es þær sogðu
eins báðar. Ok því es þat ecki at undra þótt þesse Land-náma-bók sé
lengri en nockor onnur.]

2. En þesser land-náms-menn hafa gaofgaster vereð: Í
Sunnlendinga-fiórðunge--Hrafn enn Heimske; Ketill Hoengr;20 [[321:
v. 15.]] Sighvatr Rauðe; Hásteinn Atla son; Ketilbiaorn enn Gamle;
Helge Biolan; Ingolfr; Aurlygr enn Gamle; Colgrímr (enn) Gamle;
Biaorn Gollbere; Onundr Breið-skeggr.

En í Austfirðinga-fiórðunge--Þórsteinn Hvíte; Brynjolfr enn Gamle;
Graut-Atle, ok Ketell Þiðranda syner; Hrafnkell Goðe;5 Baoðvarr
enn Hvíte; Hrollaugr, son Rognvallz iarls; Ozorr, son Ásbiarnar,
Heyangrs-Biarnar sonar, es Freys-gyðlingar 'ro frá komner; Ketell
enn Fíflske; Leiðolfr Kappe.

En í Norðlendinga-fiórðunge--Auðunn Skokull; Ingimundr Gamle; Ævarr;
Sæmundr; Eirikr í Goðdaolom; Haofða-Þórðr;10 Helge enn Magre; Eyvindr
Þórsteins son; Hámundr Heljar-skinn.

En í Vestfirðinga-fiórðunge--Hrosskell; Skalla-Grímr; Sel-Þórer;
Biaorn enn Austroene; Þórolfr Mostrar-skegg; Auðr en Diúp-auðga;
Geirmundr Heljar-skinn; Ulfr Skiálge; Þórðr Víkings15 son.

3. Svá segja fróðer menn at landet yrðe al-bygt á lx vetra, svá at
eige hefer síðan orðet fiol-bygðra. Þá lifðo enn marger land-náms-menn
ok syner þeirra.

4. Es landet hafðe lx vetra bygt vereð, vóro þesser haofðingjar20
mester á Íslande--

Í Sunnlendinga-fiórðunge--Maorðr Gígja; Iorundr Goðe; Geirr Goðe;
Þórsteinn Ingolfs son; Tungo-Oddr.

[[322: v. 15.]] En í Vestfirðinga-fiórðunge--Egill Skalla-Gríms son;
Þórgrímr Ceallacs son; Þórðr Geller.

En norðr--Miðfiarðar-Skegge; Þórsteinn Ingimundar son; Goðdoeler;
Hialta-syner; Eyjolfr Valgerðar-son; Áskell Goðe.

En í Austfirðinga-fiórðunge--Þórsteinn Hvíte; Hrafnkell Goðe;5
Þórsteinn faðer Síðo-Hallz; Þórðr Freys-goðe.

Hrafn Hoengs son hafðe þá laogsaogo.

5. Svá segja menn, at þesser hafa skírðer vereð land-náms-menn.

Helge Magre; OErlygr enn Gamle; Helge Beolan; Iorundr enn10 Cristne;
Auðr en Diúp-auðga; Ketill enn Fíflske; ok flester þeir es kómo vestan
um haf. Héldo sumer vel Cristne til dauða-dags. En þat geck ú-víða
í ætter; þvi at syner þeirra sumra reisto hof ok blótoðo. En landet
vas heiðet [972] ner hundraðe vettra.









V. Here beginneth the Settlement of the South-countrymen's Quarter,
which is the best for choice land of all Iceland, and the most noble
men have dwelt there in both clerks and laymen.

1. 1. The east friths were first settled of all Iceland, but between
Horn-frith and Reek-ness was last completely settled, for the wind
and the surf prevented the landing of men by reason of the lack of
havens and want of harbours. Some of them that first came out dwelt
nearest to the fells and marked the quality of the land there, because
the live-stock would always be trying to get from the foreshore to
the fells. The men that came out later thought that they that had
first come out had taken in settlement too much land. But king Harold
Fairhair made peace between them on these terms, that no man should
take in settlement more land than he and his shipmates could carry
fire round in one day.

2. When the sun was in the east the fire should be kindled; and
they must make [them] smoke so that one might be seen from the
other; and the fire that was made in the east must burn all day to
night-fall. They must walk from this fire [i. e. start from the eastern
fire] until the sun was in the west, and make another fire there.

2. 1. Thor-wolf, the son of Hare-wolf Horn-breaker, and his brother
Anlaf were kings of the Uplands.

With them was Flan the poet, the son of Heor, who was born and
bred up north in More on an island a short way from Borgund, which
is called Iosur-heath. Flan went to Denmark to visit king Ey-stan,
and got there great honour for his skill in poetry, so that the king
gave him his daughter.

2. Thrase was the son of Thor-wolf Horn-breaker. He went from
Haurda-land to Iceland, and took land between Iockle-river and
Cold-cleft-river, and dwelt at Bell-brink, which is now called
Thrase-stead, a short way east from the force or water-fall; but
Thrase's tomb is on the west of Force-water, rather near the river
on Drong-slope under the peak, and a slip hath fallen over it.

Gar-mund was the son of Thrase. [He was] the father of Thor-beorn,
the father of Brand, the father of Sceg, the father of Bollo of Shaw,
the father of Sceg, the father of Hilda, whom Nial, Sig-mund's son
of Shaw, had to wife. Their son was Sceg, the father of Ey-wolf,
the father of Brand that now dwelleth at Shaw.

3. 1. Raven the Fool was the name of a man of birth, the son of
Wal-gard, the son of We-mund Ordla-car, the son of Thor-wolf Wag-neb,
the son of Hrod-rec Ring-slinger, the son of Harold War-tooth,
king of the Danes. He came out from Throwend-ham to Iceland, and
took land between Cold-cleft-river and Lamb-fell-water. He dwelt at
[East] Rift-fell. His children were Helge Blue-rot, and Frey-gerd,
and Eor-wend gode.

2. As-gar or Os-gar Cneif was the name of a man, the son of Anlaf
the White, the son of Scaering, the son of Thor-wolf. His mother was
Thor-hild, the daughter of Thor-stan Barrow-breaker. As-gar came to
Iceland and took land in settlement between Selia-lands-river and
Lamb-fell-water, and dwelt at the place that is called Waste or the
Desert. His sons were Eor-wend and Thor-kell, the father of Og-mund,
the father of bishop John. A daughter of As-gar's was Helga, the
mother of Thor-wen. As-gar left off or put away sacrifices of his
own free will.

3. Thor-gar the Haurdish, the son of Bard Blending-horn, came from
Wiggia in Throwend-ham to Iceland. He bought land of As-gar Cneif,
between Lamb-fell-water and Irish-river, and dwelt at Holt. A few
winters later he took to wife As-gerd, the daughter of Asc the Dumb,
and their sons were Thor-grim the Big, and Thore of Holt, the father
of Thor-laf Crow and Scaur-Gar.

4. Unfey was the name of a nobleman in Ream-dale-folk. He was at odds
with king Harold, wherefore he made ready to go to Iceland. He had
to wife As-gerd, the daughter of Asc the Dumb. When he was bound to
Iceland, king Harold sent a man to him and had him slain, but As-gerd
went forth with their children, and with her her bastard brother,
whose name was Thor-wolf. As-gerd took land in settlement between
Shiel-lands-mull and Mark-fleet, and all Lang-ness up to Mare-rock,
and dwelt north on Caith-ness. The children of Unfey and As-gerd
were these: Thor-gar Gollne, and Thor-stan Split-beard, Thor-beorn
the Quiet, and Alofa Ellidi-shield, whom Thor-berg Corn-mull had
to wife. Their children were Ey-stan and Haf-Thora, whom Eid [Aed]
Scegsson had to wife. Thor-borg was Unfey's daughter. Fin Oht-kellson
had her to wife.

5. Thor-wolf, the brother of As-gerd, took land by her rede west of
Fleet, between both Feud-waters, and dwelt at Thor-wolf's-fell. With
him was brought up Thor-gar Gollne, the son of As-gerd, and he dwelt
there afterwards. He was the father of Nial, that was burnt in his
house and eight men with him at Berg-thor's-hillock.

6. As-beorn or Os-beorn, the son of Reed-Cetil, and Stan-fin,
his brother, took land in settlement above Cross-water, east of
Fleet. Stan-fin dwelt at Stan-fin's-stead, and there is no man come
from him. As-beorn hallowed his settlement to Thor or Thunder, and
called it Thor's-mark. His son was Cetil the Rich, that had to wife
Thor-gerd, Gollne's daughter. Their children were these: Thor-beorn
and As-gerd.

7. Here-wolf, the son of Bard, the son of Ba-rec, the brother of
Hall-grim Singe-log, first settled at West-men's-isles, and dwelt at
Here-wolf's-dale, inside Egi's-door, where now is the lava-field. His
son was Orm the [...], that dwelt at Orm-stead down below the Cliff,
where it is now all blighted, and alone owned all the islands that
lie off Ey-sands; and there was a fishing-stead there before, but
no winter abode. Orm had to wife Thor-gerd, the daughter of Ord
Cold-mouth. Their daughter was Hall-dora, whom Eilif, the son of
Field-Brand, had to wife.

4. 1. Cetil Hong [Salmon] was the name of a nobleman of Neam-dale-folk,
the son of Thor-kell the earl of the Neam-dale-men and Regin-hild,
the daughter of Cetil Salmon of Ravenist, the son of Hall-beorn
Half-troll. Cetil dwelt in Neam-dale at the time when king Harold
Fairhair sent Hall-ward Hard-farer and Sig-tryg Fast-farer to [slay]
Thor-wolf, Qweld-wolf's son, the kinsman of Cetil; and Cetil gathered
a company together, and was minded to help Thor-wolf; but king Harold
went the upper way over Ellide's tarbert, and got him a ship in
Neam-dale, and so went north to Alost in Sand-ness, and put to death
Thor-wolf Qweld-wolf's son there, and thence went back from the north
the outer way, and found many men coming to Thor-wolf's assistance,
and the king sent them home again. A little later Cetil Salmon went
north to Torgar and burnt Hrod-rec and Ha-rec, Hild-red's sons, in
their house there, for they had brought Thor-wolf to his death by
their false accusations. After that Cetil came to Iceland with his
wife and their son. He came with his ship into the mouth of Rang-river,
and stayed the first winter at Raven-toft.

2. Cetil took in settlement all the land between Rang-river and
Hrod-gar's-beck, right up to Reyd-mere, and dwelt at Temple. Cetil had
flitted most of his things to Temple. His wife Ing-wen gave birth to
a son, and there was born Raven that was afterwards Law-speaker at
the place that is now called Raven-toft. Salmon had also under him
all the land to the east of East Rang-river and Mere-fell to the beck
that runs outside the Broad-bowster and above Thwart-water, all save
Duf-thac's-holt and the Mere or Fen. This he gave to a man whose name
was Duf-thac [Dubh-thac]. He was very skin-strong [lycanthropic].

3. Helge was the name of another son of Salmon's. He had to wife
Wal-dis, Iol-gar's daughter. Their daughter was Helga, whom Ord-beorn
Ash-smith had to wife. After him Ord-beorn's tomb is called. Their
children (Ord-beorn's and Helga's) were these: Hrod-wald, Col-ban,
and Col-finna, and As-were.

4. Stor-wolf was the third son of Salmon. His children were these:
Worm the Strong, and Ord-kell, and Raven-hild that Gun-here had to
wife, the son of Beag. Their son was Ha-mund, the father of Gun-here
of Lithe's-end.

5. The fourth son of Salmon's was named West-here. He had to wife
Moeidh [     ?     ]. Their daughter was As-ny, whom Ufey Grette had
to wife. Their children were Os-mund Beardless, Os-beorn, and As-dis
[or Al-dis], the mother of Field-Brand and of Os-ware or As-were,
the mother of Helge the Black. One of them was called Asa.

6. Here-wolf was the name of the fifth son of Salmon. He was the
father of Summer-led, the father of Winter-led the poet. They dwelt at
Summer-led-by, which is now called under Brinks. Thang-brand the priest
and God-laf, Are's son of Reek-hills, slew Winter-led for a lampoon.

[M*: Double text. Winter-led made a lampoon on Thang-brand, wherefore
Thang-brand slew him as he was turf-cutting, and he defended himself
with a turf-cutter against God-laf, Are's son of Reek-ness, but
Thang-brand ran him through with a spear. Song-jaws made an Encomium
on God-laf.]

7. Sea-beorn [MS.: Swegen-beorn] gode was a son of Raven, Salmon's
son. He had to wife Unn, Sig-mund's daughter. Their son was Arn-grim.

5. 1. Sigh-wat the Red was the name of a man of birth in
Haloga-land. He had to wife Rand-weig, the daughter of Eilif Lamb,
the foster-sister of Ey-wend Poet-spoiler. His mother was Ingi-borg,
daughter of Ha-ward, the son of Grit-gard the Haloga earl.

Sigh-wat went to Iceland of his own wish, and took in settlement land
by rede or counsel of Salmon in his settlement west of Mark-fleet,
one horn's mark above Feud-water, and dwelt at Bowster.

2. His son was Sig-mund, the father of Fiddle Mord, that was
the greatest chief in Rang-field in his day, and that was held
to be a mock-moot to which he did not come. Sig-mund fell over
against Sand-hill-ferry, and there is his barrow on the east
of Steer-water. Rand-weig was a daughter of Sig-mund, whom
Ha-mund, Gun-here's son, had to wife. Their son was Gun-here of
Lithe-end. Sigh-wat's son was Barec, the father of Thord, the father
of Stan.

[S: Double text. Sig-mund, the father of Fiddle Mord, and of Sigfus
of Lithe, and of Lamb in Lamb-stead, and of Rand-weig, whom Ha-mund,
Gun-here's son, had to wife, and of Thor-gerd, whom Ean-wend Bild of
Floe, etc.]

[Another son of Sigh-wat was Barec, the father of Thord, the father
of Stan.]

6. 1. Eor-wend Gode, the son of Raven the Fool, dwelt at the west of
Fleet, at the place that is now called Swerting-stead. He raised there
a great temple. A gore of land lay between Cross-river and Marc-rock;
round that land Eor-wend carried fire, and dedicated it to the temple.

2. Eor-wend took to wife Thor-rid, the daughter of Thor-beorn the
Gaul-wersh [Gaul-man], and the bride-buying was at Scarf-ness
at Flose's, who had all the land between Steer's-river and
Eng-water. Their children were these: Wolf Aur-gode, and Thor-wen,
whom Vig-fus of Lithe had to wife, and Wal-gard of Temple. His mother
was Thor-laug, the daughter of Raven, Salmon's son. He [Wal-gard]
had to wife Unna, the daughter of Fiddle Mord, after Ram of Cam's-ness.

3. Thor-kell Bound-foot took land in settlement by rede of Salmon
round about Three-horn, and dwelt there under the mountain. He
was very skin-strong [lycanthropic].  His children were these:
Borc Blue-tooth's-beardie, the father of Starcad of Three-horn, and
Thor-wen, whom Orm the Strong had to wife, and Dag-run, the mother
of Berse.

7. 1. Beag [     ?     ] was the name of a man, Salmon's
sworn-brother. He came to Iceland, and was the first winter at
Beag-stead, and the second with Salmon. Beag was the son of Red,
the son of Ceal-lac, the son of Cear-val [Cear-bhall], king of the
Irish. He took in settlement all Fleet-lithe by rede of Cetil,
from above over Broad-bowster to march with Salmon's land, and
dwelt at Lithe's-end. His sons were these: Gun-here, and Ey-wind of
Ey-wind's-mull, and Snell-stan or Stan the Swift, and Hild was his
daughter, whom Erne of Weals-garth had to wife.

2. Stan the Swift and Sig-mund, the son of Sigh-wat the Red, went forth
from out of Eyre and came to Sand-hill-ferry all together, Sig-mund and
his mates and Stan; and each wished to cross the river first. Sig-mund
and his mates pushed away the house-carles of Stan, and drove them away
from the boat. Then Stan came up and hewed Sig-mund his death-blow.

For this slaughter the sons of Beag were made outlaws all over
the Lithe. Gun-here went to Gun-here's-holt, and Ey-wend-under-Fell
eastward to Ey-wend's-hill, and Stan went to Snell's-head. It pleased
Thor-gerd, Sig-mund's daughter, right ill that her father's slayer
should be come out thither, and she egged on Ean-wend Bild, her
husband, to avenge Sig-mund. Ean-wend went forth with thirty men to
Snell's-head, and set fire to the house there. Snell-stan walked out
and gave himself up. They led him down to the Head and there slew
him. Gun-here, his brother, took up the case of his slaying. He had
to wife Regin-hild, the daughter of Stor-wolf, the sister of Orm
the Strong. Ha-mund was their son. They were both [father and son]
men of valour, strong and determined. Ean-wend was made an outlaw
for the slaughter of Snell-stan. He stayed at home with many men
about him for two winters. Erne of Weals-garth, the brother-in-law of
Gun-here, kept an espial upon Ean-wend [for him]. After Yule the third
winter Gun-here set upon Ean-wend with thirty men by the guidance or
connivance of Erne, as Ean-wend was going from the games with twelve
men to [where he had left] his horses. They met in Battle-dale. There
Ean-wend fell and four men with him, and one of Gun-here's. Gun-here
was in a blue cloak. He rode up along Holt to Steer's-river, and a
short way from the river he fell off horseback, for he was sped by his
wounds. But when the sons of Ean-wend, Sig-mund Cleek and Eilif the
Wealthy, grew up, they went to their kinsman Fiddle-Mord to get his
help to follow up the suit. But Mord said that a suit would hardly
stand for outlawed men. They said they were most angry with Erne,
who dwelt nearest to them. Mord gave them this plan, that they should
get a case for full outlawry [lit. wood-walk case], and so get him
driven out of the country-side. Ean-wend's sons brought an action of
pasture against Erne, and he was outlawed to this extent--that he
should fall unhallowed or without were-gild before Ean-wend's sons
everywhere except on Weal's-garth, and within an arrow-shot-length
around his land. Ean-wend's sons kept on the watch for him, but he
took good care of himself.

But once upon a time as Erne was driving neat out of his land,
they fell upon him and slew him, thinking that he would have fallen
unhallowed or without were-gild. Thor-laf Spark, the brother of Erne,
gave a fee to Thor-mod, Thiost-here's son, to get him to hallow Erne
[i.e. to prove that he was slain unoutlawed], for Thor-mod was at
that time come to Iceland at Eyre. And he shot such a long shot
with his hand-bow [long-bow], that he proved that Erne's death had
taken place inside the bow-shot-length. Then Ha-mund, Gun-here's
son, and Thor-laf took up the case for Erne's death, but Mord gave
help to these brethren. They had not to pay any fine, but were made
outlaws in the hundred of Floe. Then Mord asked for Thor-katla,
Cetil-beorn's daughter, on behalf of Eilif, and there followed her
from home as marriage portion Head-land, and there Eilif dwelt. But
as for Sig-mund, he took to wife Arn-gund, the daughter of Thor-stan
Drong-carle, and he went forth to live in the east country.

Moreover Mord gave his sister Rand-weig to Ha-mund, Gun-here's son,
and he went then to dwell at Lithe's-end; and their sons were Gun-here
of Lithe's-end, and Hart, and Helge, and Buck, and Worm Shaw-neb that
fell in the Long Serpent with king Anlaf.

3. Hilde and Hall-gar, and Leot their sister, were Irish [S: by
kin of the Westernlands]. They came out to Iceland, and took land
in settlement between Fleet and Rang-water, all the island country
up to Thwart-water. Hilde dwelt at Hilde's-ey. He was the father of
Mo-eidh of Mo-eid's-hillock. Hall-gar dwelt at Hall-gar's-ey. His
daughter was Mabil, whom Helge, Salmon's son, had to wife. And Leot
dwelt at Leot-stead.

4. Duf-thac [Dubh-thach] of Duf-thac's-holt was a freedman of these
brethren. He was very skin-strong, and so was Stor-wolf, Sal­mon's son,
who then dwelt at Hillock or Knoll. They quarrelled over a pasture. A
man of second-sight saw one evening a great bear walk out from Knoll,
and a bull from Duf-thac's-holt, and meet at Stor-wolf's-field, and
fall upon each other angrily; but the bear was the stronger. On the
morning there was seen a chine or dale where they had met, as if the
earth had been turned over there, and it is now called Wave-pit. They
were both worn out and lay a-bed.

5. Eilif and Beorn, brethren, come to Iceland out of Sogn. Eilif took
in settlement Little-point up to Reyd-mere and to Wickings-beck. He had
to wife Helga, the daughter of Ean-wend Bild. Their son was Eilif the
Younger, who had to wife Ord-ny, the daughter of Ord the Slim. Their
daughter was Thor-rid, whom Thor-gar of Ord had to wife. Their daughter
was Helga.

6. Beorn dwelt at Swine-hay, and took in settlement land up along
Rang-river. His children were these: Thor-stan, the father of Grim
Bald-holt, and Hall-weig, the mother of Thor-wen, the mother of
Gud-run, the mother of Sæ-mund.

7. Col or Colli was the name of a man, the son of Oht-here Ball. He
took land in settlement east of Trout-mere, and Stoti's-brook west
of Rang-river, and Troll's-shaw to march with the lands of Thor-stan
Tent-pitcher, and dwelt at Sand-gill. His son was Egil, that waylaid
Gun-here, Ha-mund's son, hard by Cnafe's-knolls, and fell there himself
and two East-men and Are his house-carle; but Hart, Gun-here's brother,
fell of his company.

8. The sons of Gun-here were these: Grane and Ha-mund. Gun-here
fought with Ot-kell at Kirk-by by the garth at Hof, and Ot-kell and
Scam-kell fell there. Gar gode, and Gizor the White, and As-grim,
Ellidi-Grim's son, and Starcad under Three-horns, the son of Bard
Blue-beard, the son of Thor-kell Bound-foot, that had to wife Thu-rid,
daughter of Egil of Sand-gill,--these men set forth at leet-tide,
and came by night with thirty men to Lithe's-end; but Gun-here was
there and one full-grown man with him. Two men of Gar's company fell,
but sixteen were wounded ere Gun-here fell.

9. Rolf or Hrod-wolf Red-beard was the name of a man that took in
settlement all Holm-land between Fish-river and Wrong-river, and
dwelt at Force. His children were these: Thor-stan Red-neb, that
dwelt there after [him], and Thora, the mother of Thor-kell Moon,
and Asa, the mother of Thor-ny [Thor-unn], the mother of Thor-gar of
Light-water, and Helga, the mother of Ord of Mew-sound. The daughter
of Ord was As-borg, whom Thor-stan gode, the father of Beorn the Sage,
the father of Sceg, the father of Mark the Law-speaker, had to wife.

10. Thor-stan Red-neb was a great sacrificer, and he sacrificed
to the Water-fall or Force, and all leavings were carried to the
Water-fall. He was also very fore-sighted [i. e. was a seer]. Thor-stan
was wont to tell over his sheep, driving them out of the fold twenty
hundred [2400], and then they stopped counting for the sheep took to
leaping the wall. But the reason his sheep were so many was because
he could see at harvest-tide how many were fey [doomed, i. e. to
perish during the winter], and all these he had killed. But the last
harvest-tide he was alive he spake at the sheep-fold, 'Kill ye now
what sheep ye will, for I am now fey, or else all the sheep are, or
may be both they and I.' And the night he died all the sheep rushed
down into the Water-fall and perished there. Helga was the name of
his daughter, whom Holge Roe, Ceallac's son [Cetil son], had to wife.

8. 1. Wolf-gylde was a mighty herse [lord] of Thela-mark in Norway. He
dwelt at Fifle-field in Tinds-dale. His son was As-grim, the father
of these--Thor-grim and Thor-laug. Their mother's name was Thor-katla,
who was called Ringa [Buckle].

2. King Harold Fairhair sent Thor-orm his kinsman out of Thrum in
Agd to gather in As-grim's scot or tax which the king asked of him;
but he would not pay, though he had sent the king a little before a
Geatish horse and much silver, saying it was a gift, but not a tax
or gild, for he had never paid scot before. The king sent the money
back and would not receive it.

Thor-katla, As-grim's wife, gave birth to a man-child. As-grim bade
them take it out [i.e. expose it]. The thrall who was to dig his
grave was sharpening his spade, but the boy was laid down on the
floor. Then they all heard, as it were, the boy reciting these lines:--


    Give me to my mother, the floor is cold for me!
    Where should a child be better, than by his father's hearth?
    No need to put an edge on the iron nor shear the turf-strips.
    Let the wicked work be, for I shall yet live among men.


Then the boy was sprinkled with water, and called Thor-stan.

But when Thor-orm came a second time to gather the scot, As-grim
called a moot and asked the franklins if they wished to pay the king
such scot as was called for. They bade him answer for them, but they
did not wish to pay. The moot was hard by a wood, but when they were
least ware of him, Thor-orm's thrall sprang out upon As-grim and
killed him. The franklins killed him at once. Thor-stan was then away
warring, but when he heard of the slaying of his father, he sold his
lands for silver and made ready to go to Iceland out of Gran-mere,
east of Sailor's-ness; but before he set out Thor-stan burnt Thor-orm
in his house in Thrum and avenged his father.

3. Thor-gar was the name of his brother. He was ten winters old at
the time Thor-orm had their father killed. He went to Iceland with
Thor-stan and Thor-wen, their mother's sister, and took in settlement
Thor-wen's-neck, and dwelt there afterwards.

4. Thor-stan put into Wrong-river-mouth, and took land by rede of
Flose above Wicking-brook, and west to march with the land of Beorn
of Swine-hay, and dwelt at East Pass.

5. In his days there came out a ship to Rang-river-mouth, whereon was
great sickness, and no man would take them in. But Thor-stan went
and fetched them, and pitched tents for them at the place which is
now called Tilt-booths, and ministered to them himself as long as
they lived, and they all died. He was afterwards called Thor-stan
Tent-pitcher; but the one of them that lived the last, hid gold and
silver and buried it underground, so that nought of it hath ever
been found.

6. Thor-stan had to wife first Thor-rid, Gun-here's daughter, the
son of Ha-mund. Their children, Gun-here, Thor-hall, Io-stan, and
Ior-wend. Afterwards Thor-stan had to wife Thor-rid, the daughter
of Sig-fus of Lithe. Their children, Sceg and Thor-katla, Rand-weig
and Arn-thora.

7. Now Thor-gar, the brother of Thor-stan, bought Ord or Edge-land of
Raven, Salmon's son, both Strands and Warm-dale, and all the Ord or
Edge between Hrod-gar's-beck and Wrong-river. He dwelt first at Ord or
Edge, and had to wife Thor-rid, daughter of Eilif the Younger. Their
daughter was Helga, whom Swart, Wolf's son, had to wife. Their son
[was] Lod-mund of Ord, the father of Sig-fus the priest, the father
of Sæ-mund the historian.

9. 1. Flose was the name of a man, the son of Thor-beorn the Gaulwerish
[man of Gaula]. He slew three reeves of Harold Fairhair, and went
forth afterwards to Iceland, and took land in settlement east of
Rang-river, all East Rang-river-field. His daughter was As-ny,
the mother of Thor-rid, whom Field-Brand had to wife. The son of
Field-Brand was Flose, the father of Colban, the father of Gud-run,
whom Sæ-mund the historian had to wife. Floce had to wife Gud-run,
Thore's daughter, the son of Beard-Brord.

2. Loft the Old, Flose's sister's son, went to sacrifice in Gaula,
because Flose was out of the peace in Norway. Flose the Northron had
to wife Thor-dis the Big, the daughter of Thor-wen the Wealthy, the
daughter of Cetil One-hand. Their daughter was As-ny, whom Thor-gar
had to wife.

3. Cetil One-hand was the name of a man, the son of Ead-wine
Thin-car. He took in settlement Outer Rang-river-wold above
Beck-bottom and east of Steer's-river, and dwelt at River. He had
to wife As-leva, daughter of Thor-gils. Their son was Ead-wine, the
father of Bryne-wolf, the father of Berg-thor, the father of Thor-lac.

4. Cetil Trout, the cousin [son of the father's brother] of Cetil
One-hand, took land in settlement down along Steer's-river, and dwelt
at Inner-wold. His son was Helge Roe, that had to wife Holga, daughter
of Hrod-wolf [or Thor-stan] Red-beard. Their son was Ord Mewe, the
father of As-gerd, whom Thor-stan gode had to wife, and of Ord-ny,
whom Eilif the Young had to wife.

5. Orm or Worm the Wealthy, the son of Wolf the Keen, took land
in settlement along Rang-river by the counsel of Cetil One-hand. He
dwelt at House-garth, and As-kell his son after him; but his son Brand
first set up the homestead at Wold. From him are come the Wold-men.

6. Thor-stan Lunan was the name of a Northron [Norwegian] man, and a
great traveller and merchant. It was foretold of him that he should die
in a land that was not yet built. Thor-stan went to Iceland in his old
age with Thor-gils his son. They took in settlement the upper part of
Steer's-river-holt, and dwelt at Lunan's-holt, and there is Thor-stan
howed. The daughter of Thor-stan was As-laf, whom Cetil One-hand
had to wife. Their sons were these: Ead-wine, who was named above,
and Eilif, the father of Thor-gar, the father of Sceg, the father
of Sholto in Steer's-river-dale. He was the father of Ior-wen, the
mother of Gud-run, the mother of Einar, the mother of bishop Magnus.

7. Gund-stan Bear-sarks-bane, the son of Bale-work Trenail-snout,
slew two bear-sarks, one of whom had before slain Grit-gard, the
Halega earl, in Solwe inside of Agd-ness. Gund-stan was afterwards
shot with a Finnish arrow [charmed or venomed] out of the wood as he
was in his ship north in [the isle of] Hafne. The son of Gund-stan
was Thor-gar, that had to wife Thor-wen the Wealthy, the mother of
Cetil One-hand. Their daughter was Thor-dis the Big.

8. Red-worm and Iol-gar, brethren, came from west over sea to
Iceland. They took land in settlement between Steer's-river and
Rang-river. Red-worm took to himself the land east of Red-beck,
and dwelt at Wéht-laf's-holt. His daughter was Arn-borg, whom
Swerting, Heor-laf's son, had to wife. Their children were these:
Grim the Law-speaker and Ior-wen. Afterwards Peak, Mould Peak's son,
had Arn-borg to wife, and their children were Hall-stan of Shelf,
and Rand-weig, mother of Skafte the Law-speaker, and Gar-ny, mother
of poet Raven.

9. Iol-gar [     ?     ] took to himself land from outside Red-beck
to Stan's-beck, and dwelt at Iol-gar-stead.

10. Os-gar or As-gar Hnoccan was the son of Duf-thac [Dubh-thach],
the son of Duf-nial [Dubh-niall], the son of Cearval [Cear-bhall],
king of the Irish. He took land in settlement between Stan's-beck
and Steer's-river, and dwelt at Askell's-head.  His son was Os-mund,
the father of Os-gar, the father of Sceg, the father of Thor-wald,
the father of Thor-laug, the mother of Thor-gerd, the mother of
bishop John.

11. Thor-kell Delve, the foster-brother of Red-worm, took to himself
all the lands between Rang-river and Steer's-river, and dwelt at
Hafe. He had to wife Thor-wen the Island-dweller. Their daughter was
Thor-dis, the mother of Sceg, the father of Thor-wald of the Ridge.

12. From thence did Sholto, his son-in-law, get mounts to go to the
All-moot, and his eleven men when he came out with Christendom, for no
other man dared to do so much by reason of the oppression of Run-wolf,
Wolf's son, that had got Sholto outlawed for blasphemy.

Now are written the men that received and took land in settlement
within the Settlement of Cetil Salmon.

10. 1. Lopt, the son of Worm or Orm, the son of Frode [Sage], came from
Gaula to Iceland when he was yet young, and took land in settlement
beyond Steer's-river between Red-water and Steer's-river and up
to Scuf's-beck, and East Broad-mere up to Pillar-holt, and dwelt
at Gaula-ware-by [the men of Gaula's-home] with Ord-ny his mother,
the daughter of Thor-beorn the Gaulwerish.

2. Lopt went abroad every third summer, on behalf of himself and Flose
his mother's brother, to sacrifice at the Temple that Thor-beorn his
mother's father, had kept in Gaula.

3. Thor-beorn was a rich herse [lord] of Fiala-folk in Norway. He was
the son of Worm-here. He had to wife Hild, the daughter of Wolf-here
and of Thor-wen the Granings'-ptarmigan.

4. We-mund the Old, the son of Wicking the Feller of the Scaneys,
the kinsman-in-law of Beorn Buna, was a mighty lord or herse. His son
was Frode, the father of Worm, the father of Lopt the Old. From him
[Lopt] are many great men come.

5. Thor-wid, the son of Wolf-here, the father of Hild, came from Wors
to Iceland; but Lopt, his kinsman, gave him land in Broad-mere, and
he dwelt at Wors-by. His children were these: Raven and Hall-weig,
whom Ozor the White had to wife. Their son was Thor-grim Camp.

6. Thor-arin was the name of a man, the son of Thor-kell of All-water,
the son of Hall-beorn the Champion of the Haurds. He came in his
ship to Steer's-river-mouth, and had a steer's head on his fore-stem
or prow,--and the river is called after it. Thor-arin took land in
settlement above Scuf's-beck to Red-river down along Steer's-river. His
daughter was Ham-laug, whom Lopt married when he was sixty.

11. 1. Harold Gold-beard was the name of a king in Sogn. He had to
wife Sel-ware, the daughter of earl Hound-wolf, the sister of earl
Atle the Slim. Their daughters were these: Thora, whom Half-dan the
Black, the king of the Uplanders, had to wife; and Thor-rid, whom Cetil
Cave-flag had to wife. Harold the Younger was the son of Half-dan and
of Thora. To him king Harold Gold-beard gave his name and realm. King
Harold died first of them, and then Thora, and Harold the Younger
last. Then the kingdom passed under king Half-dan, and he set earl
Atle the Slim over it. Afterwards Half-dan took to wife Regin-hild,
the daughter of Sigurd Hart, and their son was Harold Fairhair.

2. When king Harold came to his kingdom in Norway, and was become
kinsman-at-law to earl Hacon Gritgardsson, he gave Sogn-folk to earl
Hacon, his father-in-law, when the king went east into Wick. But earl
Atle would not yield the earldom till he had seen king Harold. The
two earls stood firmly upon their rights, and gathered each an host
and met at Fiola in Staff-ness-voe, and fought there; and earl Hacon
fell and Atle was wounded, and he was moved to Atl-ey, and there he
died of his wounds. And after that Heah-stan or Ha-stan his son held
his father's earldom till king Harold and earl Sigurd [Hacon's son]
gathered together an host against him. Then Ha-stan made off and got
ready to go to Iceland. He had to wife Thora, the daughter of Alwe:
Alwe and Atle were their sons. Ha-stan cast his seat-stocks overboard
at sea after the  old way. They came up at Stall-shore and were
[are] used as door-pillars at Stock's-eyre, and Ha-stan put into
Ha-stan-sound, east of Stock's-eyre, and wrecked his ship. He took
land in settlement between Red-river and Olvus-water up to Fyll-beck,
and all Broad-mere up to Holt. He dwelt at Stock's-eyre, and Atle
his son after him before he flitted to Tread-holt or Pen-holt.

Alwe was the name of Ha-stan's second son. He dwelt at Stern-stan
or Anchor-rock. He died childless, and Atle took all the heritage
after him.

A freedman of Alwe was Brant, that dwelt at Brant-holt, and Leod-wolf
of Leod-wolf-stead.

Atle was the father of Thord Domne, the father of Thor-gils, Scar-leg's
step-father.

[S: Double text. Alwe took in settlement all along out to Grim's-water,
Stock's-eyre, and Asgeat-stead. But Atle held all the land between
Grim's-water and Red-river. He dwelt in Tread-holt. Alwe died
childless, and Atle took all the heritage after him--land and money
and chattels.]

3. Hall-stan was the name of a man that came from Sogn to Iceland,
kinsman-in-law to Ha-stan, who gave him the outer part of Eyre-bank. He
dwelt at Forth-ness. His son was Thor-stan, the father of Ern-grim,
that was slain when he was digging peat-logs. His son was Thor-beorn
of Forth-ness.

4. Thore, the son of Ase herse, the son of Ingi-ald, the son of
Hrod-wald, came to Iceland and took in settlement all the Rape of
Cold-ness up from Fyll-beck, and dwelt at Seal-force. His son was
Tyr-fing, the father of Thor-rid, the mother of Tyrfing, the father
of Thor-beorn the priest of God-dales.

5. Hrod-gar the Wise and Ord-gar, his brother, were Westmen [i.e. from
Ireland], to whom Fin the Wealthy and Haven-Worm sold land out of
their settlements, took in settlement the Rape of Rawn-garth, and
Ord-gar dwelt at Ord-gar's-hills. His son was Thor-stan Ox-goad,
the father of Hrod-gar, the father of Angor of Comb-cist; but the
daughter of Hrod-gar the Wise was Gund-wara, whom Col-grim the Old
had to wife. Thence are the Quistlings come.

6. Ean-wend Bild, that was spoken of before, took land in settlement
east of Hrod-gar's-beck, and dwelt at Ean-wend-holt. From him are
many great men come, as it is written before.

12. 1. Ozur the White was the name of a man, the son of Thor-laf
of Sogn. Ozur slew a man in a holy place when he was on Sig-rod the
Bastard's bridal journey, wherefore he was banished the land and [came]
to Iceland, and was the first to take in settlement all Holt-land
between Sker's-river and Rawn-brook. He was seventeen years old when he
committed the manslaughter. He took to wife Hall-weig, the daughter of
Thor-wid. Their son was Thor-grim Camp, the father of Ozur, the father
of Thor-beorn, the father of Thor-arin, the father of Grim, Tuft's son.

2. Ozur dwelt at Camp-holt. His freedman was Bead-were, that dwelt
at Bead-were's-toft by Willow-shaw. Ozur gave him a share in the
shaw, which should come back to himself if he died childless. Erne
of Weal's-garth, as it is spoken of before, summoned Bead-were for
sheep-stealing; wherefore Bead-were hand-selled Atle, Hastan's son,
all his goods, but he got the case quashed by Erne. Ozur died while
Thor-grim was yet young, then Raven, Thor-wid's son, took the wardship
of Thor-grim. After Bead-were's death Raven claimed Willow-shaw, and
warned Atle off it, but Atle claimed it as his own. Atle and three
men with him went to get wood, and Leod-wolf went with him. A shepherd
told Raven of this, and Raven rode after them with ten men. They met in
Battle-dale, and fought there. There fell four [S: two] house-carles of
Raven, and he himself was sore wounded. One house-carle of Atle's fell,
but he got his death-wound and rode home. Ean-wend Bild parted them.

Thord Domne [Timber], Atle's son, was nine years old then; but he
was fifteen when Raven rode down to a ship at Einar's-haven. He was
riding home in a blue cloak. Thord lay in wait for him over against
Howe-wade or Cairn-ford, a short way from Tread-holt, and slew him
there with a spear. Raven's barrow is there on the east of the path,
and on the west Ha-stan's barrow, and Alwe's barrow, and Atle's
barrow. The manslaughters were squared off. Thord became famous for
this deed. And now he took to wife Thor-wen, the daughter of Os-gar
Eastmen-smiter, that slew a ship's crew of Eastmen in the mouth of
Grim's-river, for a robbery that he had suffered in Norway.

Thord was two-and-twenty years old when he bought a ship in Cog-sound,
being minded to gather in his heritage. And now he hid much money
[in the earth], wherefore Thor-wen would not go out, but took over
the homestead at Tread-holt. Thor-gils, the son of Thord, was then
two winters old. Thord's ship was lost and never heard of. A winter
later Thor-grim Scar-leg came to be reeve for Thor-wen. He was the
son of Thor-mod and of Thor-rid, Cetil-beorn's daughter. He took to
wife Thor-wen, and their son was Hæ-ring.

3. An-laf Twin-brow was the name of a man that went from Lofot to
Iceland. He took in settlement all the Course between Steer's-river
and Sheep-brook. He was very skin-strong [lycanthropic]. An-laf dwelt
at An-laf's-wold. He lies in Brune's-howe under Cairn-fell. An-laf had
to wife Ans-hild, and their son was Helge the Trusty, and Thore Dufa,
father of Thor-kel Gold-car, the father of Orm, the father of Helge,
the mother of Ord, Hall-ward's son; Wade was the third son of An-laf;
[he was] the father of Gerd.

4. Thor-grim Scar-leg set his heart upon Ans-hild after An-laf was
dead, but Helge the Trusty chid him over it or forbade it. He lay in
wait for Thor-grim where the ways meet below Ans-hild's-fen. Helge
bade him stop his continual coming to the house. Thor-grim said that
he was not a child [to be chid]. They fought, and Thor-grim fell
there. Ans-hild asked Helge where he had been. He spoke these verses:--


    I was at Fyll-brook where Scar-leg fell:
    I gave Asmod's [i.e. Thormod's] heir to Woden.


        [See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 79 (corrected).]

Ans-hild said that he struck a blow that would cost him his head. Helge
took a passage abroad at Einar's-haven. Hæ-ring, Thor-grim's son, was
then sixteen winters old. He rode to Head to see Tait, Gizur's son,
with two men. Tait and his men rode fifteen together to prevent Helge
from going abroad. Helge and they met at Mark-rawn up above Mark,
over against Helge's-knoll. There were eight [three] together that
rode from Eyre. There fell Helge and a man with him, and one of Tait's
men. The slaying was counted as equal. The son of Helge was Sigurd the
Land-wersh [the Man o' Land], and Skefil the Hawk-dale man, the father
of Helge Deer, that fought with Sigurd, the son of Leot Long-back,
at Ax-water-holm at the All-moot, whereon Helge made this verse:--


    There is a band on my right hand.
    I got a wound from [the son of Leot].


        [See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 79 (corrected).]

Raven, the second son of Skefil, was the father of Grim, the father
of As-gar, the father of Helge.

5. Throwend the Far-sailer [was] the son of Beorn, the brother of
Ey-wind East-man, as was before spoken [III. 13 and 15]. He was at
Hafr's-frith against king Harold, and was afterwards banished the land,
[and he came out] to Iceland late in the times of the settlement. He
took land in settlement between Steer's-river and Lax-water, and up
to Calf-river as far as Sand-brook. He dwelt at Throwend-holt. His
daughter was Helga, whom Thor-mod [Diarmaid?] Shaft had to wife.

13. 1. Alwe Bairn-carle [i.e. the children's man] was the name of a
nobleman in Norway. He was a great wicking. He would not let men cast
children on the points of spears, as was the wickings' custom. His sons
were Stan-wolf, the father of Unna, whom Thor-beorn Salmon-man had to
wife; and Einar, the father of Un-fey Gretti, and of An-laf the Broad,
the father of Thor-mod Shaft. Stan-mod was the third son of Alwe. He
was the father of Conall, the father of Alf-dis the Barrey-woman,
whom An-laf Feilan had to wife. The son of Conall was Stan-mod, the
father of Hall-dor, whom Eilif, the son of Cetil One-hand, had to wife.

2. The kinsmen Un-fey, Grette, and Thor-mod Shaft went out to
Iceland, and stayed the first winter with Thor-beorn Salmon-man,
their kinsman-in-law; and in the spring he gave them the Rape
of the Peek-dwellers. To Un-fey he gave the outer shore between
Thwart-water and Calf-river, and he dwelt at Unfey-stead hard by
Stan's-holt; but to Thor-mod he gave the eastern shore, and he dwelt
at Shaft-holt. Thor-mod's daughters were these: Thor-wera, the mother
of Thor-ord gode, the father of Long-shaft, and Thor-weh, the mother
of Thor-stan gode, the father of Beare the Wise.

Un-fey fell before Thor-beorn the earl's champion at Grette's-gill
hard by Neck. Un-fey's daughter was Al-dis, the mother of Weald-Brand.

3. Thor-beorn Salmon-carle took in settlement all Steer's-river-dale,
and all the Rape of the Peek-dwellers down to Calf-river, and dwelt
the first winter at Mid-house. He had abode there three winters before
he came to Haye, where he dwelt till the day of his death. His sons
were these: Ot-kell or Oht-cetil of Steer's-river-dale, and Thor-gils,
the father of Ord-katla, and Thor-kell Trandil, the father of Gowk of
Stang. Ord-katla was the mother of Thor-katla, the mother of Thor-wald,
the father of Dalla [Blind], the mother of bishop Gizor.

4. Brand-wolf and Mar, sons of Naddod and of Eor-wen, the daughter
of Alwe Bairn-carle, came to Iceland early in the settling of the
country. They took in settlement the Rape of the Men of Rune, as far
as the water-parting on that side. Brand-wolf dwelt at Rock-pool. His
sons were these: Thor-laf, the father of Brand-wolf, the father of
Thor-kell Scot-Coll, the father of Thor-arin, the father of Hall of
Hawk-dale, and of Thor-lac, the father of Rune-wolf, the father of
bishop Thor-lac.

Mar dwelt at Mar-stead. His son was Beine, the father of Col-grim,
the mother of Sceg, the father of Healte or Sholto.

5. Thor-beorn the Earl's Champion was the name of a Northron
[Norwegian]. He came out of the Orkneys to Iceland. He bought land in
the Rape of the Men of Run of Mar, Naddod's son, all below Seal-brook
between Lax-waters. He dwelt at Hills. His sons were these: Sol-mund,
the father of Care o' the Burning, and Thor-mod, the father of Finna,
whom Thor-orm of Carle-frith had to wife. Their daughters were
Alf-gerd, mother of Gest....

6. Thor-brand, the son of Thor-beorn the Fierce, and Os-brand, his son,
came to Iceland late in the times of the settlement; and Cetil-beorn
directed them to a settlement above the Mull that goeth forth hard by
Stack's-water to Cold-fork, and they dwelt in Hawk-dale. They thought
their land too small, because West [East] Tongue was already settled;
wherefore they enlarged their settlement by taking the upper part of
the Rape o' the Men of Rune straightforward [i.e. as the crow flies]
from Mull in Ingiald's-peak down over Gyldes-hay. The children of
Os-brand were these: We-brand and Arn-gerd. We-brand was the father
of Ord-laug, whom Swerting, Run-wolf's son, had to wife.

14. 1. Cetil-beorn was the name of a nobleman in Neam-dale. He was
the son of Cetil and of Asa, the daughter of earl Hacon, Grit-garth's
son. He had to wife Helga, the daughter of Thord Beardie. Cetil-beorn
came to Iceland when the land was broadly settled along the sea. He
had the ship that is called Ellide. He put into the mouth of
Ellide's-river, north of Heath or Moor [Blue-shaw-heath]. He stayed
the first winter with Thord Beardie, his father-in-law.

2. But in the spring he went up over the Heath to seek him good
choice of land.--Thus says Tait. They had a sleeping-place there,
and built them a hall at the place that is now called Hall-brink in
Blue-shaw. But when they went thence they came to a river, which they
called the river Axe-water, because they lost their axe there. They
took up their abode for a while under the mull of the hill, which
they called Trout-mull, for there they left behind [forgetting them]
the river-trout that they took out of the river.

[Double text. But when they had gone a short distance they came
to a frozen river, and cut an ice-hole in it, and their axe fell
in, whence they called it Ax-water. This water was afterwards led
into the All-men's-rift, and now it runs down along the Ting-wall
[Moot-field]. Then they went to where it is now called Trout-mull;
there they lost their [catch of] trout, whence they called it
Trout-mull.]

3. Cetil-beorn took in settlement all Grim's-ness up from
Haus-Coll's-beck, and all Bath-dale, and all Bishop's-tongue up to
Stack's-water, and he dwelt at Moss-fell.

Their children were these: Tait and Thor-mod [Diarmaid], Thor-laf and
Cetil, Thor-katla and Ord-laf, Thor-gerd, Thor-rid; and yet another
son of Cetil, a bastard, was Scoring.

4. Cetil-beorn was so rich in money that he bade his sons cast or work
a cross-beam of silver for the temple that they were about building,
and they would not. Then he drove the silver up on the fell behind or
on two oxen, and Hake his thrall, and Bot his bond-woman. They buried
the treasure there, so that it hath never been found since. He killed
Hake at Hake-pass, and Bot at Bot-pass.

5. Tait had to wife Alof, the daughter of Bead-were of Wors, the
son of Wicking Care. Their son was Gizor the White, the father of
bishop Islaf, the father of bishop Gizor. Another son of Tait's was
Cetil-beorn, the father of Col, the father of Thor-kell, the father
of Col the Wick-were bishop.

Many great men are come from Cetil-beorn.

6. Ey-fred the Old took in settlement East Tongue, between Cold-fork
and White-river, and dwelt at Tongue. With him came out Drumb-Ord
that dwelt at Drumb-Ord-stead.

7. Os-gar was the name of a man, the son of Wolf. To him Cetil-beorn
gave his daughter Thor-gerth in wedlock, and there came with her from
home as a marriage-portion all Lithe-land above Hay-garth. He dwelt
at West Lithe. Their sons were Gar gode, and Thor-gar, the father of
Bard of Moss-fell.

8. Eilif the Wealthy, the son of Ean-wend Bill, took to wife
Thor-cátla, daughter of Cetil-beorn, and there followed with her from
home as marriage-portion Head-land. There they two dwelt. Their son
was Thore, the father of Thor-aren Sealing.

15. 1. We-thorm, the son of We-mund the Old, was a mighty herse. He
fled away from king Harold east into Iamta-land, and cleared the wild
forest or marks there, and settled them. Holm-fast or Amala-fast was
the name of his son, and Grim was his sister's son. They were together
on wicking cruises in the west, and there in the Southreys they slew
earl As-beorn Skerry-blesa; and there they got, as war-booty, Alofa his
wife, and Erne-heid his daughter, and Holm-fast gained her [Erne-heid]
by lot, and sold her to his father to be a bond-maid. Grim took to wife
Alofa, the daughter of Thord Wagg-agd, whom the earl had had to wife.

Grim came to Iceland and took in settlement all Grim's-ness up to
Swine-mere, and dwelt in Andorth-ness four winters, and afterwards at
Bower-fell. His son was Thor-gils, that had to wife Asa, the daughter
of Gest, Ordlaf's son. Their sons were these: Thor-arin of Bower-fell
and Eor-wend of Mid-hanger.

2. Hall-kell [was] the brother of Cetil-beorn by the same mother. He
came to Iceland and was with Cetil-beorn the first winter. Cetil-beorn
promised to give him land, but he thought it a poor thing to take
land of him, and challenged Grim to give up his land, or else to
fight a wager of battle. Grim went on the holm, i.e. fought the wager
of battle, with Hall-kell below Hall-kell's-hillocks, and there he
fell. But Hall-kell afterwards dwelt at Hillocks. His sons were these:
Ot-kell, whom Gun-here, Ha-mund's son, slew, and Ord o' Kid-rock, the
father of Hall-beorn, that was slain over against Hall-beorn's cairns
[II. 26. 3], and Hall-kell, the father of Hall-ward, the father of
Thor-stan, whom Einar the Shetlander slew. The son of Hall-kell,
Ord's son, was Bearnie, the father of Hall, the father of Orm.

Now it is come as far as the settlement of Ing-wolf, and the men
that shall now be told over were they that took up their abode in
his settlement.

16. 1. Thor-grim Bill, the brother of Ean-wend Bill, by the same
mother, was the son of Wolf of Hill. He took in settlement all the
land above Thwart-water and dwelt at Bill's-fell.

2. Stan-red was the son of Mel-patrec [Mael-Patruic], a man of birth
in Ireland. He was a freedman of Thor-grim Bild. He had to wife
a daughter of Thor-grim. He was the most handsome of men. He took
in settlement all Mere-land, and dwelt at Stan-red-stead. His son
was Thor-mod [Diarmaid], the father of Car, the father of Thor-mod
[Diarmaid], the father of Brand, the father of Thore, the father of
Brand of Thing-weald.

3. Hrod-laf, the son of Einar, the son of Alwe Bairn-carle, came into
Lear-voe when it was all inhabited along the sea. He took in settlement
land marching with that of Stan-red, all outside of Ax-water that
runs through the Moot-field or Ting-wall, and dwelt at Heath-by some
winters. Then he challenged Ey-wind of Heifer-voe or Quhae-voe to fight
a wager of battle with him or sell him his land; but Ey-wind chose
rather that they should deal over the land. Ey-wind dwelt some winters
afterwards at Heath-by, and then went to By-skerries on Walrus-ness,
but Hrod-laf afterwards dwelt at Heifer-voe, and he is howed there. His
son was Swarting, the father of Grim of Moss-fell, the Law-speaker.

4. Worm the Old, the son of earl Ey-wind, the son of earl Ern-mod,
the son of earl Nered the Stingy: Worm took land in settlement between
Warm-river and Thwart-water, all over Ing-wolf's-fell, and dwelt
at Hwam. He had to wife Thor-wen, the daughter of Cetil Keel-farer,
that smote to death the Fin-galcn [a monster of some kind]. She was
the grandfather's sister of Grim the Halegoman. Their son was Worm
the Old, the father of Darre, the father of Erne. Earl Ey-wind was
with Ceotwa the Wealthy against king Harold at Hafr's-frith.

5. Alf the Agdish [of Agd] fled before king Harold Fairhair from Agd
in Norway. He came to Iceland, and put his ship into the mouth [of
a river] that is called after him Alf's-mouth. He took in settlement
all the land outside Warm-river, and dwelt at Peak.

6. Thor-grim, Grim-wolf's son, his brother's son, came out with him;
and he it was that took all his heritage after him, for Alf was
childless. Thor-grim's son was Ey-wind. the father of Thor-ord gode,
the father of Skapte.

Ozur was also a son of Ey-wind, and he had to wife Bera, the daughter
of Egil, the son of Scald-Grim.

The mother of Thor-grim was Corm-lod [Gorm-flaith], the daughter of
Cearval [Cear-bhall], king of the Irish.

7. Thore Harvest-dark took in settlement Seal-voe and Crisu-wick,
but Hegg his son dwelt at Voe; and Bead-mod, his other son, was the
father of Thor-aren, the father of Stigand, the father of Thor-ward,
the father of Thor-hild; the mother of Sig-rod, Thor-grim's son.

8. Mould-Peak's sons took up their abode in Grind-wick, as it is
written before [IV. 17].

9. Stan-wen the Old, the kinswoman of Ing-wolf, came to Iceland and
stayed with Ing-wolf the first winter. He offered to give her all
Walrus-ness west of Hwass's-rawn; but she gave him an English cape
of various colours, for she wished to call it a bargain and sale,
for she thought there was less risk so of having the gift cancelled.

Her-laug, the brother of Scald-Grim, had had Stan-wen to wife. Their
sons were Nial and Arnor.

10. Ey-wind was the name of a kinsman and foster-son of Stan-wen. She
gave him land between Heifer-voe-rock and Hwass's-rawn. His son
was Erling [Egil], the father of Thor-aren, the father of Sigh-wat
[Sig-mund], the father of Thor-orna, the mother of Thor-beorn,
the son of Arn-theow of Crysa-wick, and of Alofu, the mother of
Law-speaker Fin.

11. Here-wolf, he that was told of before [II. 12. 7], was the kinsman
of Ing-wolf and his sworn brother, wherefore Ing-wolf gave him land
between Reek-ness and Voe. His son was Bard, the father of Here-wolf,
that went to Greenland and came into the Sea-Walls [i.e. the great
earthquake waves]. On his ship was a Southrey man, that made the
Sea-Wall-Pæan, whereof this is the beginning:--



    Let us all hearken to the song.


    [And the burden is.--See Bk. II. 12. 7.]


12. Os-beorn was the name of a man, the son of Ozur, and the brother's
son of Ing-wolf. He took land in settlement between Rawn's-holt-beck
and Hwass's-rawn, all Elfet's-ness, and dwelt at Sculi-stead. His son
was Egil, the father of Ozur, the father of Thor-arin, the father of
Olaf, the father of Swegen-beorn, the father of Os-mund, the father
of Swegen-beorn, the father of Styrcar....


Epilogue.

17. 1. Now are the settlements that have been in Iceland gone
through. [According as historians have written it, first priest Are
the Historian, the son of Thor-gils, and Col-skegg the Wise.

But this book I have written, Hawk Ellend's son, according to the
book that Sir Sturla the Lawman, the best of historians, wrote; and
according to that second book, which Styrme the Historian wrote. And
I have kept that which either gave more than the other; but in the
great bulk they were both agreed, and therefore it is no wonder if
this Book of Settlements be longer than any other.]

2. And these have been the best-born settlers.

In the South-countrymen's Quarter:--

Raven the Fool, Cetil Salmon, Sigh-wat the Red, Ha-stan Atle's son,
Cetil-beorn the Old, Helge Beolan, Ing-wolf, Aurlyg the Old, Colgrim
the Old, Beorn Gold-bearer, Ean-wend Broad-beard.

And in the East-frith-men's Quarter:--

Thor-stan the White, Bryne-wolf the Old, Grout-Atle, and Cetil
Thidrand's son, Raven-kell the gode, Bead-were the White, Hrod-laug
the son of earl Regin-wald, Ozur the son of Os-beorn Hey-ang Beorn's
son, from whom the priests of Frey's kin or Frey's gydlings are come,
Cetil the Beguiler, Leid-wolf the Champion.

And in the North-countrymen's Quarter:--

Ead-wine Shackle, Inge-mund the Old, Ew-here, Sæ-mund, Eiric o'
God-dales, Thord o' the Heads, Helge the Lean, Ey-wind Thor-stan's son,
Hamund Hell-skin.

And in the West-frith-men's Quarter:--

Hros-kell, Scald-Grim, Seal-Thore, Beorn the Eastron, Thor-wolf
Mostr-beardie, Ead the Deep o' Wealth, Gar-mund Hell-skin, Wolf Squint,
Thord Wickingsson.

3. Men of knowledge or historians say that the country was wholly
settled and taken up in sixty winters, so that it hath never after
been settled any more. At that time there were many settlers and
their sons yet alive.

4. These were the greatest chiefs in the country when the land had
been dwelt in sixty winters.

In the South-countrymen's Quarter:--Fiddle-Mord, Eor-wend gode,
Gar gode, Thor-stan Ing-wolf's son, Ord o' Tongue.

And in the West-frith-men's Quarter:--Egil Scald-Grim's son, Thor-grim
Ceallac's son, Thord Gelle.

And North:--Mid-frith Scegge, Thor-stan Ingi-mund's son, the men of
God-dales, the sons of Sholto, Ey-wolf Wal-gerd's son, As-kell or
Os-cetil gode.

And in the East-frith-men's Quarter:--Thor-stan the White, Raven-kell
gode, Thor-stan the father of Hall o' Side, Thord Frey's priest
or gode.

Raven Salmon's son was then holding the Speakership of the Laws.

5. Men say that these settlers were baptized:--Helge the Lean, Aur-lyg
the Old, Helge Beolan, Eor-wend the Christian, Ead the Deep Wealthy,
Cetil the Beguiler, and most of them that came hither from the west
of the sea.

Some held their Christendom well till their death-day, but it did not
often go on in the family, because that of their sons, some reared
temples and sacrificed, and the land was heathen nearly a hundred
[120] winters.

[Here endeth the Book of Settlements.]















CHAPTER 2

§ 2. EARLY GENEALOGIES FROM SAGAS.


Besides the pedigrees found in Are's works, there is a body of
genealogical matter of early date to be gathered from the Icelandic
family Histories to which they were added, as we hold, by 13th or
12th-century editors.

They are found under two conditions:--First, in the Lesser Sagas
attached to the end, where they clearly are but an appendage; for
whenever there are two families of MSS., only one has them, and the
others not, e.g. Floamanna or Hrafn Sweinbeornsson's Saga, where there
is an added pedigree in one vellum only. Nor are they in any case
necessary to the tale to which they are attached; but, on the contrary,
they rather spoil the artistic conclusion to which the epic narrative
is brought by introducing a fresh and somewhat discordant interest.

Secondly, they are found imbedded in the Greater Complex Sagas; here
they are common to all the MSS., forming part of the material used
by the compiler, or 13th-century editor; and he has accordingly,
in welding the separate small Sagas together to make a new and
consistent whole, found fit places for the insertion, bit by bit,
of the pedigrees at his command.

The bulk of the pedigrees given below are from Nial's Saga, which
happens to be remarkably full in the S. and SE., E. and NE. of
the island, but poor in the NW. and still more so in W.; hence in
arranging them we have reversed Are's order and worked back to the
place he starts from, going wither-shins, so that we begin where our
material is best.

These pedigrees, with those of Are, comprise all that survives of
the strictly historical lore of the 10th or 11th centuries, just as
Sturlunga Saga (Islend. Saga, ch. i), with the material printed at
the end of the 2nd vol. of the Oxford Edition (ii. 497-502) and drawn
from various sources, yields all that remains of the genealogical
knowledge of the 12th and 13th centuries.

We begin with the genealogies of Nial's Saga as the largest
collection. For this Saga, like Sturlunga alone, is catholic in
range. There is scarcely one great family in Iceland (save in the
West) of which some member is not brought in, either in the course
of the famous law cases or in the journeys of Flose, or the circuit
of Skarphedin.

The bulk of the genealogic matter is the same as that in Landnama-book,
as was to be expected, but there are some important divergencies.

Whence is this matter drawn? Here the Compiler of the Saga gives us no
direct information, and, strangely enough, the only time he mentions
an authority, Are, there is a manifest error in his statement. It is
in § 36 where, speaking of the pedigree of Thor-wolf, Mostr-beardie,
he calls him the son of Erne-wolf Fish-driver, but adds that Are
makes him the son of Thor-gils Reydar-sida. Now Are's version is
well known from Landnama and Eyrbyggia, and he uniformly makes
Thor-wolf the son of Erne-wolf, mentioning his pedigree more than
once. This is the Western local tradition. The passage is therefore
corrupt as it now stands in all copies of Nial's Saga, and must have
originally run somewhat in this way: 'He was the son of Erne-wolf,
as Are the historian says, but N. N. the historian says he was the
son of Thor-gils Reydar-sida.' The authority that differed from Are
was most likely Sæmund the historian, a local authority to the Niala
Editor. Sæmund must, in order to get his surname, have had to do
with Icelandic historical matter, and very possibly it is from some
genealogic compilation of his that the Nial's Saga Editor is writing
in his pedigree. The error must go back to the archetype. There is
a similar instance of a mistake running through all copies of Nial's
Saga in the chapter about the origin of the Fifth Court, as we have
there shown (see Bk. II. § 4).

What in other instances is the weight of the Nial's Saga pedigrees as
compared with Are's where they differ? In one case at least Are must
somewhere be wrong (Ld. V). Throughout Nial's Saga Mord Gigia, his
brothers (and sister) are made the children of Sighwat the Settler,
of whom a special tale is told, and who undoubtedly existed. And this
chimes in with the contemporary pedigrees, for Mord is associated
with Settler's sons, the second generation, and it also agrees with
the position and associations of Gunnar of Lithe-end, his sister's
son. But Are puts in another step thus:--



------
FIGURE


[**ERROR: unhandled comment start]
Are==         Sighwat
                 |
              Sigmund
    _____________|________________________
   |         |        |         |         |
Rannweig    Mord    Sigfus    Lambe    Thorgerd,
   |                  |                m. Onund Bild
 Gunnar             Thrain



Nials S.==    Sighwat
    _____________|________________________
   |         |        |         |         |
Rannweig    Mord    Lambe    Sigfus    Thorgerd,
   |                            |      m. O. B.
 Gunnar                      Thrain
-->

------



bringing a Sigmund (who probably was Sighwat's brother) into the
line, in such defiance of what is known of the living relations
of Mord and Gunnar, that when writing Tima-tal (Safn 282-83) this
discrepancy forced itself on the Editor and gave him great trouble,
the evidence of contemporary parallel pedigrees being entirely on
the side of the Nial's Saga.

The text here given is founded on these MSS.:--



[**TODO: Verify table]
    Cd.      =   AM. 468.
    B.       =   AM. 132 (fol.); begins in ch. 25.
    G.       =   Graskinna (Cd. Reg.), in charter hand.
    K.       =   Kalfaloek-bóc, AM. 133 (fol.).
    fragm.   =   AM. 162, biggish fragment [used for the Fifth Court
                 chapter later], faulty in pedigrees.



None of the MSS., taken singly, gives the pedigrees in anything like
a fair condition; none can in point of accuracy compare with the
Landnama vellums. Names or sets of names are skipped and misread,
now in this, now in that vellum, in a manner somewhat bewildering;
yet, taken all together, they yield a fair text. Hence the fault lies,
not with the original scribe or even with the Niala editor, but with
the scribes of our texts, to whom the genealogies were mere tinkling
sound and ornament.

The pedigrees in Ld. begin at the beginning and go downward; but the
Niala genealogist starts with his hero and counts backwards as far as
he can. Thus Ld. runs usually f. N.N.; f. N.N.; f. N.N.; but Niala
runs N.N. s.; N.N. s.; N.N. s. It is this peculiarity of his which
has made the long roll of running genitives ending with the familiar
'the son of Cetil Flat-neb, the son of Biorn Buna, the son of Grim
lord of Sogn'--the names of the three patriarchs of the Settlement
closing the tale.





SECTION A

A. From Niala.



The South Quarter [cp. Ld. Bk. V].

1. [Ch. 25.] Valgarðr hét maðr; hann bió at Hofe við Rang-aó; hann vas
sonr Iorundar Goða, Hrafns sonar [973] [ens] Heimska, Valgarz sonar,
Ævars sonar, Vémundar sonar Orðlu-kars, Þórolfs sonar Vaganefs,
Þróndar sonar ens Gamla, Harallz sonar Hilldi-tannar, Hroereks
sonar Sloengan-bauga, Halfdanar5 sonar, Fróða sonar, Hroereks
sonar [974]. Móðer Harallz Hildi-tannar vas Auðr, dótter Ívars
Víð-faðma, Halfdanar sonar ens Snialla. Bróðer Valgarz ens Grá vas
Ulfr Avrgoðe, es [975] Odda­verjar ero frá komner. Ulfr aorgoðe vas
faðer Svartz, faoðor Loðmundar, faoðor Sigfúss, faoðor Sæmundar (ens)
Fróða. [976]--En frá10 Valgarðe es komenn Kolbeinn Unge. Þeir broeðr
Ulfr Orgoðe ok Valgarðr enn Gráe fóru at biðja Unnar, ok giptez hon
Valgarðe án ráðe allra frænda sínna. [V. 3. 1.]

2. [Ch. 52.] Rúnolfr hét maðr, son Ulfs aorgoða; hann bió í Dale fyr
austan Markar-fliót. [V. 6. 2.]15

3. [Ch. 1.] Maorðr hét maðr, es kallaðr vas Gígja; hann vas sonr
Sigvaz ens Rauða; hann bió á Velle á Rang-ár-vaollom; hann vas ríkr
haofðinge ok mála-fylgjo-maðr mikill, ok svá mikill laga-maðr, at
oenger þótto laogleger dómar nema hann vere í. Hann átte dóttor eina,
es Unnr hét. [V. 5. 1.]20

4. [Ch. 57.] Starkaðr hét maðr; hann vas sonr Barkar Blá­tannar-skeggs,
Þórkels sonar Bundin-fóta, es land nam um-hverfis Þríhyrning: hann vas
kvángaðr maðr, ok hét kona hans Hallbera; hon vas dótter Hróallz ens
Rauða, ok Hilldi-gunnar, dóttor Þórsteins Titlings. Móðer Hilldi-gunnar
vas Auðr, dótter Eyvindar Karpa, syster Modolfs ens Spaka frá Mosfelle,
es Modylfingar 'ro frá komner. Syner þeirra Starkaðar ok Hallbero
vóro þeir Þórgeirr, ok Borkr, ok Þórkell: Hildi-gunnr lækner var
syster þeirra.5

5. [Ch. 19.] Gunnarr hét maðr; hann var frænde Unnar; Rann­veig hét
móðer hans, ok vas Sigfúss dótter, Sigvaz sonar ens Rauða.--Hann
vas vegenn við Sandhóla-ferjo. Faðer Gunnars hét Hámundr, ok vas
sonr Gunnars Baugs sonar.--Við þann es kennt Gunnars-holt. Móðer
Hámundar hét Hrafnhilldr; hon vas10 Stórolfs dótter, Heings [977]
sonar. Stórolfr vas bróðer Hrafns laog­saogo-mannz. Sonr Stórolfs vas
Ormr enn Sterke. Gunnarr Hámundar son bió at Hlíðar-enda í Fliótz-hlíð;
bróðer hans hét Colskeggr: Annarr bróðer hans hét Hiaortr; hann vas þá
í bernsko: Ormr Skógar-nef vas bróðer Gunnars laun-getenn:15 Arnguðr
hét syster Gunnars; hána átte Hróarr Tungo-goðe, son Una ens Óborna,
Garðars sonar--Sá fann Ísland. Son Arngunnar vas Hrómundr Halte,
es bió á Hámundar-staoðom. [V. 7. 2.]

6. [Ch. 35.] Þráinn hét maðr; hann vas Sigfús son, Sigvaz SONAR ens
Rauða; hann bió at Griót-aó í Flióz-hlíð; hann vas20 frænde Gunnars ok
virðinga-maðr mikill; hann átte Þórhilde Skáld-kono; hon vas orð-gífr
mikit ok fór með flimtan.

7. [Ch. 41.] Sigmundr hét maðr: hann vas Lamba son, Sigvaz sonar ens
Rauða. [V. 5. 2.]

8. [Ch. 20.] Niáll hét maðr; hann vas sonr Þórgeirs Gollnis [978],25
Þórolfs-sonar; móðer Niáls hét Ásgerðr [979], ok vas dótter Ása hersiss
ens Omálga: hon hafðe komet út hingat til Íslannz, ok numet land fyr
vestan Markar-fliót, miðle Ioldu-steins [980] ok Selja-lannz-múla. Sonr
henar vas Hollta-Þórer, faðer þeirra Þórleifs Kraaks es Skógverjar
ero frá komner, ok Þórgríms ens Mikla, ok Skorar-Geirs.30 Niáll bió at
Bergþórs-hvále í Landeyjom. Bergþóra hét kona hans; hon vas Skarpheðins
dótter; þau aótto sex baorn, doetr þriár ok sono þriá. [V. 3. 4.]

9. [Ch. 39.] Þórðr hét maðr ok vas kallaðr Leysingja son; Sigtryggr
hét faðer hans, ok hafðe hann verit leysinge Ásgerðar,35 móðor Nials
ok Hollta-Þóris; hann druc knaðe í Markar-flióte.

10. [Ch. 117.] Ingialldr bió at Keldom, bróðer Hróðnyjar, móðor
Haoscollz Nials sonar. Þau vóro baorn Haoscollz [981] ens Hvíta,
Ingiallz sonar ens Sterka, Gerfinz sonar ens Rauða, Solva sonar,
Gunnsteins sonar Berserkja-bana; Ingialldr átte Þraslaugo, dóttor40
Egils, Þórðar sonar Freys-goða. Móðer Egils vas Þraslaug, dótter
Þórsteins Titlings: móðer Þraslaugar vas Unnr, dótter Eyvindar Karpa
syster Modolfs ens Spaka [982]. [Cp. V. 9. 7.]

11. [Ch. 149.] Á mið-boenom bió sá maðr es Biaorn hét; hann var kallaðr
Biaorn enn Hvíte; hann vas Caðals son, Bialfa [983] sonar. Bialfe
hafðe veret leysinge Ásgerðar, móðor Niáls ok Hollta-Þóris. Biaorn
átte þá kono es Valgerðr hét; hon var Þórbranz [984] dótter, Ásbranz
sonar. Móðer hennar hét Goðlaug; hon var syster5 Hámundar, faoðor
Gunnars frá Hlíðar-enda. Hon vas gefen til fiár Birni.

12. [Ch. 58.] Egill hét maðr; hann vas Kols sonr, Óttars sonar Ballar,
es land nam meðal Stota-loekjar ok Reyðar-vaz [985]. Bróðer Egils
vas Onundr í Trolla-skóge, faðer Halla ens Sterka, es vas at10 víge
Hollta-Þóris með sonom Ketils ens Slétt-mála. Egill bió í Sand-gile;
syner hans vóro þeir Colr, ok Óttarr, ok Haukr; móðer þeirra hét
Steinvaor, syster Starkaðar. [V. 7. 7.]

13. [Ch. 26.] Ásgrímr hét maðr; hann vas Elliða-Gríms son, Ásgríms
sonar, Avndotz sonar Kraóko. Móðer hans hét Iórunn,15 ok vas Teitz
dótter, Ketilbiarnar sonar ens Gamla frá Mosfelle. Móðer Teitz
vas Helga, dótter Þórðar Skeggja, Hraps sonar, Biarnar sonar Bunu,
Gríms sonar hersess or Sogne. Móðer Iórunnar vas Ólof Árbót, (dótter)
Baoðvars hersess, Víkinga-Kára sonar. Bróðer Ásgríms Elliða-Gríms sonar
hét Sigfús; hans dótter vas Þórgerðr,20 móðer Sigfúss, faoðor Sæmundar
ens Fróða. Ásgrímr átte tvá sono, ok hét hvárr-tvegge Þórhallr. Grímr
hét ok sonr Ásgríms, en Þórhalla dótter. [III. 13, 15.]

14. [Ch. 46.] Gizorr hét maðr; hann vas Teitz son, Ketilbiarnar
sonar ens Gamla frá Mosfelle: móðer hans hét Álof; hon var25 dótter
Baoðvars hersess, Víkinga-Kára sonar. Hans sonr vas Ísleifr byscop:
móðer Teitz hét Helga, ok vas dótter Þórðar Skeggja, Hraps sonar,
Biarnar sonar Bunu, Gríms sonar hersess or Sogne [986]. Gizorr Hvíte
bió at Mosfelle ok vas haofðinge mikill. [V. 14.]

Sá maðr es nefndr til saogonnar es Geirr Goðe hét, Ásgeirs30 son,
Ulfs sonar [987]; móðer hans [988] hét Þórkatla, dótter Ketilbiarnar
Gamla frá Mosfelle. Geirr bió í Hlíð í Byscops-tungo [989].

15. [Ch. 47.] Otkell hét maðr; hann vas Skarfs son, Hallkels sonar--Sá
barðez við Grím í Gríms-nese, ok fellde hann á holme. Þeir vóro broeðr,
Hallkell ok Ketilbiaorn Gamle. Hann bió í35 Kirkjo-boe. Þórgerðr
hét kona hans; hon vas Más dótter, Runolfs sonar, Naddaðar sonar ens
Færeyska. [V. 15. 2.]

16. [Ch. 56.] Skafte hét maðr; hann vas Þóroddz sonr: móðer Þóroddz
vas Þórvaor; hon vas dótter Þórmoðar Scafta, Óleifs sonar Breiðs,
Einars sonar [990], Olvés sonar Barna-karls. [V. 13. 2.]40

17. [Ch. 126.] At Reykjom á Skeiðom bió Rúnolfr, Þórsteins
son. Hildi-glúmr hét son hans.

18. [Ch. 13.] Broeðr þrír ero nefnder til saogonnar; hét einn
Þórarenn, annarr Rage, þriðe Glúmr: þeir vóro syner Óleifs Hiallta
[991], ok vóro virðinga-menn mikler, ok vel auðger at fé. Þórarenn
átte þat kenningar-nafn, at hann vas kallaðr Raga-bróðer, hann hafðe
laogsaogo efter Hrafn Hæings [992] son; hann var stór-vitr5 maðr ok
bió at Varma-loek. [I. 9. 4.]



The East Quarter [cp. Ld. Bk. IV].

19. [Ch. 97.] Hallr hét maðr er kallaðr vas Síðo-Hallr; hann vas
Þórsteins son, Baoðvars sonar. Móðer Hallz hét Þórdís, ok vas
Ozorar dótter, Hroðlaugs sonar, Raognvallz sonar iarls  af Moere,
Eysteins sonar Glumro: Hallr átte Ióreiðe, Þiðranda dóttor ens10
spaka, Ketils sonar Þryms, Þóris sonar Þiðranda [993] or Veradale;
bróðer Ióreiðar [994] vas Ketell Þrymr í Niarð-vík, ok Þórvalldr,
faðer Helga Droplaugar sonar. Hallkatla vas syster Ióreiðar, móðer
Þórkels Geitis sonar ok Þiðranda. Þórsteinn hét bróðer Hallz ok vas
kallaðr Breið-mage; hans sonr vas Colr, es Cáre vegr í Bretlande.15
Syner Hallz á Síðo vóro þeir Þórsteinn, ok Egill, Þórvarðr [995],
ok Liótr, ok Þiðrande--þann es sagt es at díser væge. [IV. 12.]

20. Þórer hét maðr ok vas kallaðr Hollta-Þórer; hans syner vóro þeir
Þórgeirr Skorar-Geirr, ok Þórleifr Krákr, es Skógverjar ero frá komner,
ok Þórgrímr enn Mikle [996]. [V. 3. 3.]20

21. [Ch. 116.] Flose sende orð Col Þórsteins syne, ok Glúme
syne Hildiss ens Gamla, Geirleifs sonar, Onundar sonar
Tosco-baks. [V. 18. 2.]

22. Þaðan reið hann til Haofða-brecko: þar bió Þórgrímr Skraute,
sonr Þórkels ens Fagra.25

23. [Ch. 102.] Þaðan fóro þeir vestr til Skóga-hverfiss, ok gisto í
Kirkjoboe; þar bió Svartr. Ásbiarnar son, Þórsteins sonar, Ketils sonar
ens Fíflska--þeir haofðo aller veret Cristner lang-feðgar. [IV. 16.]

24. [Ch. 103.] Þaðan fóro þeir til Dyr-hóla [997], ok aótto þar
fund ok buðo þar trú; ok cristnaðez þar Ingialldr, son Þórkels    30
Háeyiar-tyrðils [998].

25. [Ch. 96.] Maðr es nefnðr Flose; hann vas sonr Þórðar Freys-goða,
Avzorar sonar, Ásbiarnar sonar, Eyjangrs-Biarnar sonar, Helga sonar,
Biarnar sonar Bunu, Gríms sonar hersess or Sogne [999]. Móðer Flosa
vas Ingunn, dótter Þóress á Espe-hóle, Hámundar35 sonar Heljar-skinnz,
Hiors sonar, Hálfs sonar þess es réð fyr Hálfs-reckom, Hiorleifs sonar
ens Kven-sama. Móðer Þóress vas Ingunn, dótter Helga (ens) Magra, es
nam Eyjafiaorð. Flose átte Steinvaoro, dóttor Hallz á Síðo; hon vas
laun-geten ok hét Sólvor móðer hennar, dótter Herjolfs Hvíta. Flose
bió at Svína-felle, ok40 vas haofðinge mikill.... Bróðer hans hét
Starkaðr, hann vas eigi [1000] sam-moeðr [1001] við Flosa. Móðer
Starkaðar vas Þraslaug, dótter Þór­steins Titlings [1002], Geirleifs
sonar; en móðer Þraslaugar vas Uðr; hon vas dótter Eyvindar Karfa
[1003] landnáma-mannz, ok syster Modolfs ens Spaka. Broeðr Flosa vóro
þeir Þórgeirr ok Steinn, Kolbeinn5 ok Egill. Hildiguðr hét dótter
Starkaðar bróðor Flosa. [IV. 15.]

26. [Ch. 135.] Þaðan fóro þeir á Valþiófs-staðe: þar bió Sorle
Brodd-Helga son, bróðer Biarna [1004]; hann átte Þórdíse dóttor
Goðmundar ens Ríka á Maoðro-vaollom.

27. Þar [í Niarðvík] bioggo broeðr tveir, Þórkell Full-spakr ok10
Þórvalldr bróðer hans: þeir vóro syner Ketils, Þiðranda sonar ens
Spaka, Ketils sonar Þryms, Þóriss sonar Þiðranda. Móðer þeirra
Þórkels Full-spaks ok Þórvallz vas Yngvilldr, Þórkels dótter
Full-spaks. [IV. 1.]

28. (Flose ...) fór þaðan til Vápnafiarðar, ok kom til Hofs:15 þar
bió Biarne Brodd-Helga son, Þórgils sonar, Þorsteins sonar ens Hvíta,
Aulvés sonar, Ásvallz [1005] sonar, OExna-Þóris sonar. Móðer Biarna
vas Halla Lýtings dótter: móðer Brodd-Helga vas Ásvor, dótter Þóriss,
Graut-Atla sonar, Þóriss sonar Þiðranda. Biarne Brodd-Helga son átte
Rannveigo, Þórgeirs dóttor, Eiriks sonar or20 Goðdaolom, Geirmundar
sonar, Hróallz sonar, Eiriks sonar Orðig-skeggja. [IV. 3.]

29. Þaðan fóro þeir austr til Breiðdals í Heydala: þar bió Hallbiaorn
enn sterke; hann átte Oddnýjo systor Sorla Brodd-Helga sonar.

30. Þaðan ... á Hrafnkels-staðe: þar bió Hrafnkell, Þóriss son,25
Hrafnkels sonar Raums. [IV. 6.]



The North Quarter [cp. Ld. Bk. III].

31. [Ch. 100.] Þórgeirr hét maðr es bió at Liósa-vatne; hann (vas)
Tiorva sonr, Þórkels sonar Langs. Móðer hans hét Þórunn ok vas
Þórsteins dótter, Sigmundar sonar, Gnúpa-Bárðar sonar. Guðríðr hét kona
hans; hon vas dótter Þórkels ens Svarta yr Hleiðrargarðe:30 hans bróðer
vas Ormr Tosku-bak, faðer Hlenna ens Gamla yr Saurboe. Þeir Ketill ok
Þórkell vóro syner Þóris Snepils, Ketils sonar Brimils, Ornolfs sonar,
Biornolfs sonar, Gríms sonar Loðinkinna [1006], Ketils sonar Heings
[1007], Hallbiarnar sonar half-trollz or Hrafn­isto. [IV. 16.]35

32. [Ch. 114.] Maðr es nefndr Goðmundr enn Ríke, es bió á
Maoðro-vaollom í Eyjafirðe: hann vas Eyjolfs son, Einars sonar,
Auðunnar sonar Rotins, Þórolfs sonar Smiors, Þórsteins sonar Skrofa,
Grímr sonar Cambans: móðer Goðmundar hét Hallbera, dótter Þóroz Hialms;
en móðer Hallbero hét Regin-leif, dótter40 Sæmundar ens Suðreyska--Við
þann es kennd Sæmundar-hlíð í Skaga-firðe. Móðer Eyjolfs, faoðor
Goðmundar, vas Valgerðr Rúnolfs dótter: móðer Valgerðar vas Valbiorg;
hennar móðer vas Iórunn en Óborna, dótter Ósvallz konungs ens Helga:
móðer Iórunnar vas Bera [1008], dótter Iátmundar konungs ens Helga
[1009]: móðer Einars [1010], faoðor Eyjolfs, vas Helga, dótter Helga
ens Magra, es nam Eyjafiaorð; hann vas sonr Eyvindar Austmannz ok
Rafortu, dóttor5 Cearvals Íra konungs. Móðer Helgo, dóttor Helga, vas
Þórunn Hyrna, dótter Ketils Flatnefs, Biarnar sonar Bunu, Gríms sonar
hersiss: móðer Gríms vas Hervaor; en móðer Hervarar vas Þórgerðr,
dótter Háleygs [1011] konungs af Háloga-lande. Þórlaug hét kona
Góðmundar ens Ríka, dótter Atla ens Ramma, Eilífs sonar10 Arnar, Bárðar
sonar í Ál, Ketils sonar Refs, Skíða sonar ens Gamla. Herdís hét móðer
Þórlaugar, dótter Þórðar at [1012] Haofða, Biarnar sonar Byrðu-smiors,
Hróallz sonar, Hroðlaugs sonar Hryks, Biarnar sonar Iarn-síðu, Ragnars
sonar Loðbrókar, Si­gurðar sonar Hrings, Rannvés sonar, Raðbarz
sonar. Móðer15 Herdísar Þórðar [1013] dóttor vas Þórgerðr Skíða d.;
hennar móðer vas Friðgerðr, dótter Cearvals Íra konungs, Goðmundr var
haofðinge mikill ... ok es frá hónum komet allt et mesta mann-val á
landeno, Odda-verjar, ok Sturlungar ok Hvamm-verjar, ok Flióta-menn
[1014], ok Ketill byscop, ok marger ener mesto menn. [IV. 11-14, 6,
7, etc.]20

33. [Ch. 120.] Þaðan fóro þeir til búðar Skagfirðinga: þá búð átte
Hafr enn Auðge: hann vas sonr Þórkels, Eiriks sonar yr Goðdaolom,
Geirmundar sonar, Hróallz sonar, Eiriks sonar aorðum-skeggja [1015], es
fellde Griótgarð (iarl) í Soknar-dale í Norege: móðer Hafrs hét Þórunn,
ok vas dótter Ásbiarnar Myrkár-skalla, Hross-biarnar25 sonar. [IV. 8.]

34. Þá búð hafðe tialdat Þórkell Hákr: hann vas sonr Þórgeirs Goða,
Tiorva sonar, Þórkels sonar Langs: en móðer Þórgeirs vas Þórunn,
Þórsteins dótter, Sigmundar sonar, Gnúpa-Bárðar sonar; Móðer
Þórkels Háks hét Goðríðr; hon vas dótter Þórkels ens30 Svarta or
Hleiðrar-garðe, Þóris sonar Snepils, Ketils sonar Brimils [1016],
Ornólfs sonar, Biornólfs sonar, Gríms sonar Loðin-kinna, Ketils sonar
Hæings, Hallbiarnar sonar Half-trollz. [IV. 16.]



The West Quarter [cp. Ld. Bk. II].

35. [Ch. 1.] Nú víkr saogonne vestr til Breiða-fiarðar-dala: maðr
es nefndr Haoscollr; hann vas Dala-Collz son: móðer hans35 hét
Þórgerðr, ok vas dótter Þórsteins ens Rauða, Óleifs [1017] sonar ens
Hvíta, Ingiallz sonar, Helga sonar. Móðer Ingiallz vas Þóra, dótter
Sigurðar Orms-í-auga, Ragnars sonar Loðbrócar: Uðr en Diúpvðga vas
móðer Þórsteins Rauðs, dótter Ketils Flatnefs, Biarnar sonar Bunu,
Gríms sonar hersess or Sogne. Haoscullr40 bió á Haosculldz-staoðum í
Laxár-dale: Hrútr hét bróðer hans; hann bió á Hrútz-staoðom; hann vas
sam-moeðr við Haosculld [1018]; faðer hans vas Herjolfr. Haoscollr átte
ser dóttor es Hallgerðr hét ... broeðr Hallgerðar vóro þeir Þórleikr,
faðer Bolla; ok Oláfr, faðer Ceartans; ok Bárðr. [II. 14, 15.]

36. [Ch. 115] Snorre hét maðr, es kallaðr vas Goðe: hann bió5 at
Helga-felle, áðr Goðrún Osvitrs dótter keypte at hónom landet, ok
bió hon þar til elle; en Snorre fór þá til Hvamms-fiarðar ok bió í
Sælingsdals-tungo. Þórgrímr hét faðer (Snorra), ok vas Þórsteins
(son) Þorska-bíz, Þórolfs sonar Mostrar-skeggs, Ornolfs sonar
Fiskreka.--En Are [1019] enn Fróðe (sic) seger hann vesa son Þórgils10
Reyðar-síðo.--Þórolfr Mostrar-skegg átte Osco, dótter Þórsteins
ens Rauða [1020]: móðer Þórgríms hét Þóra, dótter Óleifs Feilans,
Þórsteins sonar Rauðs, Óleifs sonar (ens) Hvíta, Ingiallz sonar,
Helga sonar. En móðer Ingiallz hét Þóra, dótter Sigurðar Orms-í-auga,
Ragnars sonar Loðbrócar: en móðer Snorra Goða vas Þórdís,15 Súrs
dótter, syster Gísla. [II. 10.]

37. [Ch. 139.] Eyjolfr hét maðr; hann vas Bolverks son, Eyjolfs
sonar ens Grá or Ottra-dale, Þórðar sonar Gelliss, Óleifs sonar
Feilans. Móðer Eyjolfs Grá vas Hróðný, dótter Miðfiarðar Skeggja,
Skinna-Biarnar sonar, Skútaðar-Skeggja [1021] sonar.20

38. [Ch. 101.] Með hónum fór sá maðr Íslenzkr er Guðleifr hét, hann
vas sonr Ara Márs [1022] sonar, Atla sonar, Ulfs sonar ens Skiálga,
Haogna sonar ens Hvíta, Ótryggs sonar, Óblauðs sonar, Hiorleifs sonar
ens Kven-sama Haorðalannz konungs. [II. 19.]



SECTION B

B. From other Sagas.


From Laxdola Saga. (Cd. = AM. 132; W = Watz-hyrna; fragm. = Add. 20.)


1. Born þeirra Óláfs ok Aldísar vóro, Þórðr Gellir ... hána25 átte
Þórarenn Raga-bróðer Laogsaogo-maðr. [See Landn. II. 15. 14.]

2. [Ch. 31.] Goðmundr hét maðr, Solmundar son; hann bió í
Ásbiarnar-nese í Víði-dale; Goðmundr vas auðigr maðr; hann bað Þóríðar
ok gat hána með miklo fé. Þóríðr vas vitr kona ok30 skap-stór,
ok skaorungr mikill. Hallr hét son þeirra, ok Barðe, Steinn ok
Steingrímr. Goðrún hét dótter þeirra ok Álof. Þórbiaorg, dótter
Óláfs, vas kvenna vænst ok þreklig; hon vas kaolloð Þórbiaorg Digra,
ok vas gift vestr í Vatz-fiaorð Ásgeire Knattar-syne [1023]; hann vas
gaofigr maðr: þeirra sonr vas Ceartan, faðer Þórvallz,35 f. Þórðar,
f. Snorra, f. Þórvallz--Þaðan es komet Vatzfirðinga kyn. Síðan
átte Þórbiaorgo Vermundr Þórgrímsson: þeirra dótter vas Þórfinna,
es átte Þórsteinn Cugga son. Bergþóra Oláfs dótter vas gift vestr í
Diúpa-fiaorð Þórhalle goða, syne Odda Yrar sonar [1024]; þeirra son
vas Ceartan, faðer Smið-Sturlo; hann vas fóstre40 Þórðar Gils sonar,
faoðor Sturlo [1025].

3. [Ch. 32.] Osvifr hét maðr, ok vas Helga son, Óttars sonar, Biarnar
sonar ens Aust-roena, Ketils sonar Flatnefs, Biarnar sonar Bunu: móðer
Osvifrs hét Niðbiorg; hennar móðer Caðlín, dótter Gaungu-Hrólfs,
OExna-Þóres sonar; hann vas herser ágætr austr í Vík--Því var
hann Oxna-Þórir [1026] kallaðr, at hann átte eyjar þriár, ok átta5
tige yxna í hverre; hann gaf eina eyna ok yxnena með Hákone [1027]
konunge; ok varð sú giaof all-fræg. Osvifr vas spekingr mikill; hann
bió at Laugom í Sælings-dale--Lauga-boer stendr fyr norðan [1028]
Sælingsdals-aó gegnt Tungo--Kona hans hét Þórdís, dótter Þióðolfs
[1029] ens [1030] Lága. Óspakr hét son þeirra; annarr Helge; þriðe
Vandráðr;10 fiórðe Torráðr; fimte Þórólfr. Aller vóro þeir vígleger
menn. Goðrún hét dótter þeirra. [II. 9.]

4. [Ch. 40.] Ásgeirr hét maðr, ok vas kallaðr Æðe-collr, hann bió at
Ásgeirs-aó í Víðedale; hann vas sonr Auðunnar Skokuls--Hann kom fyrst
sínna kyns-manna til Íslannz; hann nam Víðe-dal.15 Annarr son Auðunnar
hét Þórgrímr Hæro-collr; hann vas faðer Ásmundar, faoðor Grettis.

Ásgeirr Æðe-collr átte fimm baorn--Son þeirra hét Auðunn; faðer
Ásgeirs, f. Auðunnar, f. Egils, es átte Ulfeiðe, dóttor Eyjolfs en
Halta; þeirra sonr vas Eyjolfr, es vegenn vas á Alþinge.20 Annarr son
Ásgeirs hét Þórvaldr; hans dótter Dalla, es átte Ísleifr byscop; þeirra
sonr vas Gizor byscop. Enn þriðe sonr Ásgeirs hét Kalfr.... Dótter
Ásgeirs hét Þóríðr; hon vas gift Þórkatle Cugga, syne Þórðar Gellis;
þeirra son vas Þorsteinn. Onnor dótter Ásgeirs hét Hrefna ... (who
marries Ceartan). [III. 4.]25



From Bergsbok. (Cd. Holm. on an inserted slip.) North and West.

5. Maorgom maonnom þyckir fræði ok skemtan í at vita hverso ætter
Íslendinga koma saman við haofðingja ætter í Norege, ok einkanliga
við konunga-ætternar sialfar, efter því sem ener mesto fræðe-menn
hafa saman-sett, ok sialfar landnáms boekrnar vátta.

Onundr hét maðr, ok var kallaðr Tréfótr, son Óleifs Bullo-fótar,30
Ívars sonar Beitils; hann barðez í móte Haralde konunge í Hafrs-firðe,
ok lét þar fót sínn. Efter þat fór hann til Íslannz, ok nam land frá
Kleifom til Ofæro, Kallbaks-vík, Kolbeins-vík, Byrgis-vík, ok bió í
Kallbak til elle. Hann vas bróðer Guðbiargar, móðor Guðbrannz Kúlu,
f. Ástu, m. Oláfs ens Helga. Þórný vas syster35 Ástu, m. Hallvarz ens
Helga; aonnor Ísgerðr, m. Steigar-Þóriss. Sonr Onundar hét Gretter,
f. Surtz, f. Þórunnar Skalld-kono. Halla hét dótter Grettis, m. Kára
þess er tulkare var kallaðr--hann átte tvá knaorro senn í faorom;
hann var faðer Þóris, f. Gunnlaugs á Skalmar-nese.40

Þórgeirr Flosco-bakr var annarr son Onundar, faðer Þórmóðar
læknis. Þriðe var Ásgeirr Æði-collr, faðer Kalfs, ok Hrefnu, es átte
Ceartan Óláfsson, ok Þóríðar [1031], er Þórkell Cugge átte, en síðarr
Steinþórr Óláfsson. Hinn fiórðe son Onundar var Þórgrímr Hæru-collr,
faðer Ásmundar Hæru-langs, faoðor Grettis ens Sterka, Þór­steins ok
Atla. Þórbiaorn Ongull vá Gretti; en Þórsteinn vá Þór­biaorn út í
Mikla-garðe, ok hefnde Grettis. [II. 29.]

Hunda-Steinarr hét iarl á Englande; hann átte Álofo, dóttor5 Ragnars
Loðbrócar, Sigurðar sonar Hrings: móðer hennar var Þóra Borgar-hiaortr,
dótter Herraðar iarls á Gautlande. Þeirra baorn vóro þau, Biaorn,
faðer Auðunnar Skokuls; ok Eirikr, faðer Sigurðar Bióða-skalla,
f. Eireks á Opro-stoðom, f. Ástríðar, m. Oláfs konungs Tryggva
sonar. Ísgerðr var dótter þeirra Steinars10 iarls, er átte Þórer
iarl í Verma-lande. Auðunn Skokull fór til Íslannz ok nam Víðe-dal;
hans dótter var Þóra Moshals, m. Ulf­hildar, m. Asto, m. Oláfs
konungs Helga. Son Auðunnar var Ásgeirr at Ásgeirs-aó; hann átte
Iórunne, dóttor Ingimundar ens Gamla, Þórsteins sonar, Ketils sonar
Þrums, Orms sonar Skelja-mola,15 Hrossbiarnar sonar, Raums sonar,
Iotunbiarnar sonar norðan or Norege. Ketill átte Mioll, dóttor Áns
Bog-sveigiss. Baorn þeirra Ásgeirs ok Þórunnar vóro þau Þórvaldr,
etc. [III. 4.]



From Glúma.

6. Baoðvarr hét maðr; hann vas son Víkinga-Kára, ok bróðer Sigurðar,
faoðor Vigfúss; hann var faðer Ástríðar, móðor Eireks,20 faoðor
Ástríðar, móðor Oláfs Tryggva sonar. Víkinga-Káre var son Eymundar
Aska-spillis, Þóris sonar. Baoðvarr vas faðer Álofar, móðor Gizorar
ens Hvíta.



From Olaf Tryggvason's Life.

(AM. 61 (fol.) in Gizur's speech, see Cristni Saga.)

7. Hialte er Skeggja son, Þórgeirs sonar, Eilífs sonar, Ketils
sonar ens Ein-henda. Móðer Hialta var Þórgerðr, dótter Hlífar,25
dóttor Torf-Einars iarls, Rognvallz sonar Moera iarls. En ek em,
sagðe Gizorr, son Teitz Ketilbiarnar sonar, Ketils sonar ríks
mannz or Naumu-dale. Móðer Ketilbiarnar hét Æsa, dótter Há­konar
iarls Griótgarz sonar.  Móðer Teitz faoðor míns, sagðe Gizurr, vas
Helga, dótter Þórðar Skeggja, Hrapps sonar, Biarnar30 sonar Bunu,
Veðr-Gríms sonar. En móðer mín vas Álaof, dótter Baoðvars, sonar
Víkinga-Kára. Var Baoðvarr bróðer Eireks af Ofro-stoðom móðor-faoðor
þíns, konungr! [V. 9. 6.]



From Sturlunga I (vol. i, pp. 5, 6).

The Pedigree of Skard-Snorre (died 1170).

8. Dótter Geirmundar vas Ýr, móðer Þóroddz, f. Brodda, faoðor Hallbero,
es átte Baorkr, son Þórmóðar Þióstars sonar.35

9. Steinolfr enn Láge, son Hrólfs hersiss af Ogðom, nam land miðle
Búðardals-ár ok Tialda-ness, ok bió í Fagra-dale; hans dótter vas
Helga, móðer Hyrnings Oláfsb., es átte Arndíse, dóttor Geirmundar
Heljar-skinnz; þeirra dótter vas Frið-gerðr, móðer Sneris Þóroddz
sonar, f. Odda, f. Þórgils Odda sonar. Onnor dótter Steinolfs ens
Lága or Fagra-dale vas Arndís, móðer Þórðar, f. Þórgerðar, m. Hrafns,
f. Snartar, f. Védísar, m. Haollo, m. Yng­villdar, es átte Snorre
laogsaogo-maðr [died 1170] faðer Narfa, f. Skarð-Snorra.5

10. Ingolfr Arnar son, hann stað-festez fyrstr á Íslande
land-náms-manna, svá at menn kunne ætter sínar til at telja. Ingolfr
vas faðer Þórsteins, f. Þórkels Mána Laogsaogo-mannz: Þórhildr vas
dótter Þórsteins Ingolfs sonar, móðer Þórkels, f. Ketils, f. Hauks,
f. Yngvilldar, m. Snorra, f. Narfa, f. Skarð-Snorra.10

Hrollaugr hét sonr Raognvallz iarls á Moere: frá hónom ero Síðo-menn
komner. Hans sonr vas Ozorr, f. Þórdísar, m. Hallz á Síðo.

Egill, sonr Hallz, vas faðer Þórgerðar, m. Ioans byscops.

Yngvilldr Hallz dótter vas móðer Þóreyjar, m. Sæmundar ens Fróða.15

Þórvarðr Hallz son vas faðer Þórdísar, m. Ióreiðar, m. Hallz prestz
í Hauka-dale, Teitz sonar.

Þórsteinn Hallz son vas faðer Magnúss, f. Einars, f. Magnúss byscops.

Liótr Hallz son vas faðer Goðrúnar, m. Einars Ara sonar, ok20
Steinunnar, m. Guðmundar ok Hallbero, m. Þórgils, f. Húnboga,
f. Snorra, f. Narfa, f. Skarð-Snorra.

Móðer Skarð-Snorra vas Goðrún, Þórðar dótter, Oddleifs sonar, Þórðar
sonar Kráko-nefs.

Þesse vóro systkin Skarð-Snorra: Þórðr es átte Ióreiðe, Hallz­dóttor;25
þeirra dótter var Helga, er Sturla átte Þórðar son Laog­maðr. Þórbiaorn
vas laun-getenn ok Halldís. Yngvellde, systor Snorra, átte Gunnsteinn
Hallzson; hon var móðer Vígfúss ok þeirra systkina. Guðríðr,
syster Snorra, vas móðer Guðmundar prestz Óláfs sonar ok þeirra
systkina. Hallgerðe, systor Snorra,30 hána átte Þórðr under Felli; hon
vas móðer Snorra ok Guðmundar, ok Yngvildar, m. Petrs í Skógar-nese,
Snorra sonar.

Biaorn, son Ketils Flatnefs, vas faðer Ceallacs, f. Þórgríms,
f. Vémundar, f. Yngvildar, m. Þórðar, f. Yngvilldar, m. Snorra
Hún­boga sonar.35

Dalcr vas bróðer Þórgils Hafliða sonar; hann vas faðer Bersa,
f. Halldórs prestz í Saurboe, f. Þórsteins es átte Ingegerðe, Philippus
dóttor, Sæmundar sonar.



Pedigree of Thorgils Oddason and the Reyknesings.

11. Þórgils vas sonr Odda, Sneris sonar, Þóroddz sonar. Móðer Sneris
vas Friðgerðr Hyrnings dótter. Hyrningr átte Arndíse,40 dóttor
Geirmundar Heljar-skinnz. Móðer Odda Sneris sonar vas Álof, dótter
Bitro-Odda, Þórbiarnar sonar. Móðer Bitro-Odda vas Yngvilldr, dótter
Álfs í Daolom. Yngvillde hafðe átte Þórvaldr Eyr-goðe, Steingríms son,
es nam Steingríms-fiaorð ok bió í Trolla-tungo.--Sá kyn-þaottr Þórgils
Odda sonar es sumom ókunnare an45 Reyknesinga.--Hallbera hét móðer
hans, dótter Ara af Reykja-nese. Kolfinna hét kona Þórgils, dótter
Hallz Styrmis sonar, Þórgeirs sonar frá Ásgeirs-aó, etc. [see Sturl.,
vol. i, p. 8].

12. Þeir broeðr Þórgils ok Illoge vóro syner Ara Márs [1032] sonar,
Ulfs sonar ens Skiálga es nam Reykja-nes, Haogna sonar ens5 Hvíta,
Ótryggs sonar, Óblauðs sonar, Hiorleifs sonar konongs. Þórgerðr
hét móðer þeirra Þórgils ok Illoga; hon vas dótter Alfs or
Daolom. Móðer Alfs vas Hildr, Þórsteins dótter ens Rauða, Óleifs
sonar ens Hvíta, Ingiallz sonar, Fróða sonar. Móðer hennar vas Þóra,
dótter Sigurðar Orms-í auga: móðer Sigurðar vas Áslaug,10 dótter
Sigurðar Fáfnes-bana. Þórgeirr Hávars son vas systrungr Þórgils Ara
sonar.--Fóstbroeðra Saga, [AM. 132, the Flatey-book and Cod. Reg. omit
this pedigree.]



Snorre-Gode's Children (Eyrb., last chapter).

13. Hann batt tengðer við en mezto stór-menne í Breiða-firðe ok
víðarr annar-staðar.15

Hann gifte dóttor sína Sigríðe Brande enom Orva, syne Vermundar ens
Mióva; hána átte síðarr Colle Þórmóðar son, Þórláks sonar bróðor
Steinþórs á Eyre; ok bioggo þau í Biarnar-haofn.

Unne, dóttor sína, gifte hann Víga-Barða; hána átte síðarr Sigurðr,
son Þóriss Hundz or Biarkey á Háloga-lande, ok vas20 þeirra dótter
Rannveig, es átte Ioan, son Arna, Arna sonar, Arnmóðs sonar; þeirra
son vas Víðcunnr or Biarkey, es einn hefer veret hellztr lendra manna
í Norege.

Snorre gifte dóttor sína Þórdíse Bolla, Bolla syne: ok ero af þeim
komner Gils-beckingar.25

Hallbero, dóttor sína, gifte Snorre Þórðe, syne Sturlo Þióðreks sonar;
þeirra dótter vas Þórríðr, es átte Hafliðe Márs son: ok es þaðan
komen mikil ætt.

Þóro, dóttor sína, gifte Snorre Cero-Bersa, syne Halldórs Óláfs
sonar or Hiarðar-hollti; hána átte síðan Þórgrímr Sviðe: ok es30
þaðan komen mikil ætt ok gaofog.

En aðrar doettr Snorra vóro giftar at hónom dauðom:--

Þórríðe ena Spaoko, Snorra dóttor, átte Gunnlaugr son Steinþórs
af Eyre.

En Goðrúno, dóttor Snorra Goða, átte Kalfr [or Kolfiðr] af
Sól­heimom.35

Halldóro Snorra dóttor átte Þórgeirr or Ásgarðz-hólom.

Alófo Snorra dóttor átte Iorundr Þórfinnz son, bróðer Guðlaugs or
Straumfirðe.

Halldórr, Snorra son Goða, vas gaofgastr sona hans; hann bió í40
Hiarðar-holte í Laxár-dale. Frá hónom ero komner Sturlungar ok
Vatzfirðingar.

Þóroddr, Snorra son Goða, vas annarr gaofgastr; hann bió at
Spákono-felle á Skaga-straond.

Máne, son Snorra, bió at Sauða-felle; hans son vas Liótr, es kallaðr
vas Mána-Liótr: hann vas kallaðr mestr sona-sona Snorra Goða.

Þórsteinn Snorra son bió at Laugar-brecko: ok ero frá hónom komner
Ásbirningar í Skagafirðe, ok mikil ætt.

En Þórðr Kause, son Snorra, bió í Dufgus-dale.5

Eyjolfr, son Snorra Goða, bió á Lamba-staoðom á Mýrom.

Þórleifr, son Snorra Goða, bió á Meðal-fellz-straond: frá hónom ero
komner Ballæringar.

Snorre, son Snorra Goða, bió í Tungo efter faoðor sínn.

Kleppr [or Klyppr] hét son Snorra Goða, ok vito menn eige10 bú-stað
hans, ok eige vito menn ne einar saogor af hónom.



Descendants of Herdis Bolle's Daughter [Laxd. S., ch. from 309].

14. Herdís, Bolla dótter, vóx upp at Helga-felle, ok vas allra kvenna
vænst; hennar bað Ormr, son Hermundar, Illuga sonar ens Svarta:
var Herdís gift Orme; fór hon til búss með hónom í Calmans-tungo
... [1033] þeirra son vas Coðran, es átte Guðrúno Sig­mundar15 dóttor;
son Coðrans hét Hermundr; hann átte Alfeiðe [1034], dóttor Rúnolfs,
Ketils sonar byscops; syner þeirra vóro, Ketill [died 1220], es ábóte
vas at Helga-felle, ok Hreinn, Coðran, ok Styrmer.

Dótter Orms ok Herdísar Bolla dóttor hét Þórvaor; hána átte20 Skegge
Brannz son.--Þaðan es komet Skógverja-kyn.

Óspakr hét son Bolla ok Þórdísar: dótter Óspaks Bolla sonar hét Goðrún;
hána átte Þórarenn Brannz son; þeirra son vas Brandr, es staðenn sette
at Húsa-felle; hans son vas Sighvatr prestr es þar bió lenge síðan.25

Geller Þórkelsson kvángaz nú; hann feck Valgerðar, dóttor Þórgils Ara
sonar af Reykja-nese; hann varð haofðinge mikill. Geller fór útan ok
vas með Magnúse enom Góða, ok þá af hónom tolf aura gollz ok mikit fé
annat. Syner Gelless vóro þeir Þórkell ok Þórgils: son Þórgils vas Are
enn Fróðe; son Ara hét Þórgils;30 hans son vas Are enn Sterke.--Laxd.,
AM. 309.


Hall o' Side's Descendants [from the end (extant in a single copy)
of Thorstan Hall o' Side's Son's Saga].

15. .... [Defective] .... (Þórvaldr var) bróðer Ióreiðar, faðer Helga
ok Gríms Droplaugar sona [blank] Hallkatla móðer Þórkels Geitis sonar
í Crossavík.

Ólof hét syster Hallz á Síðu; hon var móðer Kolbeins Flosa35 sonar,
Þórðar sonar Freys-goða at Svína-felle.

Liótr, son Hallz, átto Helgo, dóttor Einars frá Þver-aó, ok vas þeirra
dótter Goðrún, es átte Are Þórgils son af Reykja-nese.

Annarr son Hallz vas Þórsteinn (er nú hefer veret frá sagt um hríð).40

Þriðe son Hallz vas Egill, hann átte Þórlaugo, dóttor Þórvallz or
Áse or Hiallta-dale; þeirra dótter vas Þórgerðr, móðer Ioans byscops
ens Helga.

Colr var enn fiórðe son Hallz; hann átte Álofu dóttor Ozorar frá
Breið-aó.

Fimte son Hallz vas Þórvarðr, faðer Þórdísar, móðor Iórunnar,5 er átte
Teitr [1035], son Ísleifs byscops, Gizorar sonar ens Hvíta; þeirra son
[i.e. the son of Tait] var Hallr, faðer Gizorar, f. þeirra Magnúss bps,
ok Þórvallz, f. Gizorar.

Yngvildr hét dótter Hallz; hána átte Eyjolfr, son Guðmundar ens Ríka af
Maoðro-vaollom; þeirra dótter vas Þórey, móðer Sæmundar10 ens Fróða,
f. Loptz, f. Ioans [1036], f. Sæmundar í Odda. [Teitr Ísleifsson átte
Iórunne; hennar móðer var Þórdís, dótter Þórvarðz [1037] Hallz­sonar
af Síðo.]

Þórgerðe, dóttor Hallz á Síðo, átte Þórgrímr, son Digr-Ketils.

Gró, dóttor Hallz á Síðo, átte [1038] Snorre Kalfsson, en efter hann15
átte Gró Þórvarðr Kraóko-nef.

Þórdíse, dóttor Síðo-Hallz, átte Þórðr Halldórsson or Fors-ár-skógom.

Gille [Thorstan o' Side's thrall] þessi var son Iathguðs, Gilla sonar,
Biaðuchs sonar, Cearvals sonar, konungs af Írlande ens20 Gamla,
er þar ríkte lenge.--Ibid.



Horda-Kare's Generations.

Á Horða-lande vóro þá menn marger ríker ok ágæter es komner vóro frá
Horða-Kára: Horða-Káre átte fióra sono--

Einn vas Þórleifr enn Spake: annarr Ogmundr, faðer Þórolfs Skíalgs,
f. Erlings á Sóla: Þórðr enn þriðe, faðer Klypps hersiss25 es drap
Sigurð konung Slevu Gunhildar son: fiórðe son Horða-Kára vas Olmóðr
enn Gamle, faðer Áskels, f. Ásláks Fitja-skalla. Vas þesse ætt-boge
mestr ok gaofgaztr á Horða-lande es komenn vas af ætt Horða-Kára.--Olaf
Tryggvason's Life.



The same.

16. Hrólfr í Berge, Upplendinga konungr, var faðer Soelga30 konungs,
f. Boðvars konungs, (f.) Kauns, f. Þóris konungs Svira, f. Onars
konungs, (f.) Arnar Hyrnu. Hans syner vóro þeir Þórleifr Hvala-skúfr,
f. Baoðvars Snæþrymu, f. Þórleifs Miðlungs; annarr Aslákr Bifro-Káre,
faðer Ketils Horða-Kára: hann var ágætr maðr ok réð fyrer Upplaondom:
hann lagðe under sik þriá35 konunga af sínne hreyste ok harð-fenge ok
eignaðiz þeirra ríke. Hann átte maorg baorn, ok er frá hónom komenn
enn gildaste ætt-boge ok mart stór-menne.

Þesse vóro baorn Horða-Kára. Þórleifr enn Spake, Ogmundr, Olmóðr
enn Gamle, Þórðr Hreða, Þóra móðer Ulfliótz es laog40 hafði til
Íslannz. Ogmundr var f. Þórolfs Skialgs, f. Erlings á Sóla. Olmóðr enn
Gamle var faðer Áskels, f. Asláks Fitja-skalla, f. Sveins Bryggjo-fótz,
f. Bergþórs Bucks, f. Sveins. Gunnarr hét son Laga-Ulfliótz; hann
átte Þóro, dóttor Helga ens Magra; þeirra sonr var Ketill í Diúpa-dale.

Þórðr Hreða var fyrst kallaðr son Ketils Horða-Kára; hann var5 ágætr
maðr á Upplondom; hans son var Klyppr herser: annarr son hans var
Steingrímr: þriðe Eyjolfr: Sigríðr hét dótter hans. Klyppr herser var
enn ágætazte maðr af örve sínne ok at-gerve, efter því sem forellre
hans var til. Hann átte Álaofo Asbiarnar dóttor: þeirra dótter hét
Guðrún, kvenna vænst ok vitruz ok skaorungr10 enn meste. Þórðr Hreða
kvángaðiz í elle sinne í annan tíma efter er en fyrre kona hans var
dauð: hann feck þá Helgo, Vémundar dóttor Iarðlokars (!), Þórolfs-sonar
Vága-nefs, Hroereks sonar Sloengvan-bauga, Harallz sonar Hilde-tannar
Dana konungs. Þá foerðe Þórðr bygð sína í ey þá er Hising hét; hann
var þá15 bæðe gamall ok skaollóttr; var þá skift um viðr-nefne hans
ok var hann þá kallaðr Þórðr Hísinga-skalle.--Thord Saga in Watz-hyrna.











CHAPTER 3

§ 3. THE THORSNESS SETTLEMENT.

(Chapters 1-11 of Eyrbyggia Saga.)


The eleven first chapters of the complex history known as Eyrbyggia
Saga are of different composition to the rest of the matter to which
they are prefixed. In style and content they are one with Are's work,
and must be taken with it.

The text of Eyrbyggia rests on five vellums:--



[**TODO: Verify table]
A.   Watz-hyrna, extant in paper transcripts. AM. 448, AM. 442, AM.
     146, fol.
M.   Melabok, imperfect. AM. 445 b.
W.   Wolfenbüttel, imperfect at beginning, but also represented by copy
     AM. 446.
B.   AM. 309. Imperfect, has beginning, but not end.
     AM. Add. 20 fol. imperfect, a small fragment.



The best of these is the Watz-hyrna text. Watz-hyrna was a contemporary
of Flatey-book and of the 14th century: it was destroyed in the
Copenhagen fire of 1728.

The part of the 4th chapter which describes the temple is really a
gloss put in from another work, and it will be found in its place
with other like fragments in Book II. § 2.





1. 1. Ketill Flatnefr hét herser einn ágætr [1039] í Norege; hann vas
sonr Biarnar Bunu, Gríms sonar hersess or Sogne. Ketill Flatnefr vas
kvángaðr; hann átte Yngvilde [1040], dóttor Ketils Veðrs hersess af
Rauma-ríke. Biaorn ok Helge héto syner þeirra, en doettr þeirra vóro
þoer Auðr en Diúp-auðga ok Iórunn Manviz-brecka. Biaorn, son Ketils,
vas fóstraðr austr á Iamta-lande [1041] með iarle þeim es Ceallacr
hét, vitr maðr ok ágætr. Iórunn5 átte son es Biaorn hét, en Giaflaug
hét dótter hans.

2. Þetta vas í þann tíma es Haralldr konungr enn Hárfagre geck til
ríkiss í Norege. Fyr þeim ófriðe flýðo marger gaofger menn óðul sín af
Norege, sumer austr um Kiaolo, sumer vestr um haf: þeir vóro sumer,
es héldo sik á vetrom í Suðreyjom eðr í [1042]10 Orkneyjom; en um
sumrom herjoðo þeir í Noreg, ok goerðo mikinn skaða í ríke Harallz
konungs. Boendr kærðo þetta fyr konunge, ok baóðo hann frelsa sik af
þessom ófriðe. Þá goerðe Haralldr konungr þat ráð, at hann lét búa
her vestr um haf, ok kvað Ketil Flatnef skyldo haofðingja vesa yfer
þeim her. Ketill15 talðesk undan, en konungr kvað hann þó [1043]
fara skyldo. Ok es Ketill sá, at konungr vill ráða, ræzk hann til
ferðarennar, ok hefer með ser kono sína ok baorn sín aoll [1044],
þau sem þar vóro.

3. En es Ketill kom vestr um haf, átte hann nockorar orrostor,
ok hafðe iafnan sigr. Hann lagðe under sik Suðreyjar, ok goerðesk20
haofðinge yfer; sættesk hann þá við ena stoersto haofðingja þá es vóro
[1045] fyr vestan haf, ok batt við þá tengðer, en sende austr aftr
[1046] herenn. Ok es þeir kómo á fund Harallz konungs, saogðo þeir,
at Ketill Flatnefr vas haofðinge í Suðreyjom; en eigi saogðosk þeir
vita, at þat moende framm draga ríke Harallz konungs [1047] fyr vestan
haf. En er konungr spyrr þetta, þá tekr hann under sik eigner þær es
Ketill átte í Norege.5

4. Ketill gifte Auðe, dóttor sína, Óleife enom Hvíta, es þá vas mestr
her-konungr fyr vestan haf; hann vas son Ingiallz, Helga sonar, en
móðer Ingiallz vas Þóra, dótter Sigurðar Orms-í-auga, Ragnars sonar
Loðbrócar. Þórunne Hyrnu gifte hann Helga enom Magra, syne Eyvindar
Austmannz ok Rafurtu, dóttor Cearvals Íra10 konungs.

2. 1. Biorn, son Ketils Flatnefs, vas á Iamta-lande þar til es
Ceallacr iarl andaðesk. Hann feck Giaflaugar dóttor iarls, ok fór
síðan austan um Kiaol, fyrst til Þróndheims, ok síðan suðr í [1048]
land, ok tók under sik eigner þær es faðer hans hafðe15 átt; en rak
í braut ár-menn þá es Haralldr konungr hafðe þar sett.

2. Haraldr konungr vas þá í Víkenne es hann spurðe þetta; ok fór þá et
oefra norðr til Þróndheims: ok es hann kom í Þróndheim, stefnde hann
átta fylkja [1049] þing; ok á því þinge goerðe hann Biaorn Ketils son
útlaga af Norege; goerðe hann dræpan ok til-toekjan20 hvar sem yrðe
[1050] fundenn. Efter þetta sende hann Hauk Hábrók ok aðra kappa sína,
at drepa hann, ef þeir fynde hann. En es þeir kómo suðr um Staðe, urðo
viner Biarnar við varer ferð þeirra, ok goerðo hónom niósn. Biaorn
hlióp þá á skúto eina, es hann átte, með skulda-lið sítt ok lausa-fé,
ok fór undan suðr með lande--því þá vas vetrar-megn, ok treystesk
hann eige á haf at halda [1051].

3. Biaorn fór þar til es hann kom í ey þá es Mostr heiter, es liggr
fyr Sunn-Hörða-lande; ok þar tók við honom sá maðr, es Þórolfr
[1052]5 (hét), Ornolfs son Fiskreka; þar vas Biaorn um vetrenn á
laun. Konungs-menn hurfo aftr þá es þeir haofðo skipat eigner Biarnar
af konungs hende [1053], ok setta menn yfer.

3. 1. Þórolfr [1054] vas haofðinge mikell, ok enn meste rausnar-maðr;
hann varð-veitte þar í eyjonne Þórs-hof [1055], ok10 vas mikell
vin Þórs--ok af því vas hann Þórolfr kallaðr--hann vas mikell maðr
ok sterkr, fríðr sýnom ok hafðe skegg miket--því var hann kallaðr
Mostrar-skegg--hann vas gaofgastr maðr í eyjonne [1056].

2. Um váret féck Þórolfr Birne lang-skip gótt ok skipat góðom drengjom,
ok feck Hallstein son sínn til fylgðar við hann; ok15 héldo þeir
vestr um haf á vit frænda Biarnar. En es Haralldr konungr spurðe, at
Þórolfr Mostrar-skegg hafðe haldet Biaorn Ketils son, útlaga konungs,
þá goerðe hann menn til hans, ok boðaðe hann [1057] af laondom, ok bað
hann fara skyldo útlaga sem Biaorn vin hans, nema hann kome á konungs
fund, ok láte hann20 einn skapa ok skera þeirra í miðlom [1058].

3. Þat vas tio vetrom síðarr an Ingolfr Arnar son hafðe faret at
byggja Ísland, ok vas sú ferð all-fræg orðen, þvi at þeir menn es
kómo af Íslande [1059] saogðo þar góða lannz-koste.

4. 1. Þórolfr Mostrar-skegg feck at blóte miklo, ok geck til fréttar
við Þór ást-vin sínn, hvárt hann skylde sættask við konung, eða
fara af lande á braut, ok leita ser5 svá annarra forlaga. En frétten
vísaðe Þórolfe til Íslannz. Ok efter þat feck hann ser miket haf-skip
ok bió þat til Íslannz-ferðar, ok hafðe með ser skulda-lið sítt ok
bú-ferle. Marger viner hans réðosk til ferðar með hónom. Hann tók
ofan hofet, ok hafðe með ser flesta viðo, þá es þar haofðo í veret,
ok svá moldena undan10 stallanom [þar és Þórr hafðe á seteð].

2. Síðan siglðe Þórolfr í haf; ok byrjaðe hónom vel; ok fann landet,
ok siglðe fyr sunnan vestr um Reykja-nes; þá fell byrrenn, ok saó þeir
at skaórosk í landet inn firðer stórer. Þórolfr kastaðe þá fyr borð
aondoges-súlom sínom, þeim es staðet haofðo í hofeno:15 þar vas Þórr
skorenn á annarre [1060]. Hann mælte svá fyrer, at hann skylde þar
byggja á Íslande sem Þórr léte þær á land koma. En þegar es þær hóf
frá skipeno, sveif þeim til ens vestra fiarðarens, ok þótte þeim fara
eige vaóno seinna. Efter þat kom haf-gula; siglðo þeir þá vestr fyr
Snæfellz-nes [1061], ok inn á fiaorðenn. Þeir siá,20 at fiaorðrenn es
ákaflega breiðr ok langr, ok miok stór-fiaollótt hvaórom-tveggja megen.
Þórolfr gaf nafn firðenom, ok kallaðe Breiða-fiaorð. Hann tók land
fyr sunnan fiaorðenn, nær miðjom, ok lagðe skipet á vág þann es þeir
kaolloðo Hofs-vág [1062] síðan.

3. Efter þat kaonnoðo þeir landet, ok fundo á neseno [1063] því
framan-verðo, es vas fyr norðan vágenn, at Þórr vas á land komenn með
súlornar.--Þat vas síðan kallat Þórs-nes.--Efter þat fór Þórolfr5
elde um land-nám sítt, útan frá Staf-aó, ok inn til þeirrar ár, es
hann kallaðe Þórs-aó, ok bygðe þar skip-verjom sínom. Hann sette boe
mikenn við Hofs-vág, es hann kallaðe á Hofs-staoðom. Þar lét hann
reisa hof, ok vas þat miket hús: vóro dyrr ... [see Bk. II. § 2].10

4. Þórolfr kallaðe Þórs-nes miðle Vigra-fiarðar ok Hofs-vágs. Í
því nese [1064] stendr eitt fiall: á því fialle hafðe Þórolfr svá
mikenn átrúnað, at þangat skylde enge maðr óþvegenn líta, ok oengo
skylde tortíma í fialleno, hvárke fé né maonnom, nema sialft genge í
braut.--Þat fiall kallaðe hann Helga-fell; ok trúðe, at hann15 moende
þangat deyja í fiallet, ok aller frændr hans. [1065]

5. Þar á neseno, sem Þórr hafðe á land komet, [1066] lét hann hafa dóma
alla, ok sette þar héraðs-þing. Þar vas ok svá mikell helge-staðr, at
hann vilde með oengo móte láta saurga vaollenn, hvárke í heiftar-blóðe,
ok eige skylde þar alf-rek ganga,--ok vas haft til þess20 sker eitt
es Drit-sker vas kallat.

6. Þórolfr goerðesk rausnar-maðr mikell í bue síno, ok hafðe fiol-mennt
með ser, þvi at þá vas gott matar at afla af eyjom [1067] ok af
aoðro sió-fange.

5. 1. Nú skal segja frá Birne, Ketils syne Flatnefs: at hann siglðe
vestr um haf þá es þeir Þórolfr Mostrar-skegg5 skilðo, sem fyrr
seger. Hann hélt til Suðreyja. En es hann kom vestr um haf, þá vas
andaðr Ketell, faðer hans: en hann fann þar Helga bróðor sínn ok
systr sínar, ok buðo þau hónom góða koste með ser.

2. Biaorn varð þess víss, at þau haofðo aoll saman [1068] annan
átrúnað,10 ok þótte hónom þat lítil-mannligt, es þau haofðo hafnat
fornom sið þeim es frændr þeirra haofðo haft: ok nam hann þar eige
ynðe, ok enga stað-festo vilde hann þar taka; vas hann þó um vetrenn
með Auðe systor sínne ok Þórsteine syne hennar. En es þau fundo,
at hann vilde eige oeðlask [1069] við frændr sína, þá kaolloðo þau
hann15 Biaorn enn Austroena, ok þótte þeim ílla es hann vilde eige
þar stað-festask.

6. 1. Biorn vas tvá vettr í Suðreyjom áðr hann bió ferð sína til
Íslannz. Með hónom vas í ferð Hallsteinn Þórolfs­son. Þeir tóko
land í Breiða-firðe, ok nam Biaorn [1070] land út frá20 Staf-aó,
miðle ok Hrauns-fiarðar, með ráðe Þórolfs. Biaorn bió í Borgar-holte
í Biaornar-haofn; hann vas et mesta gaofog-menne.

2. Hallsteine Þórolfs syne þótte lítil-mannligt at þiggja land at
faoðor sínom; ok fór hann vestr yfer Breiða-fiaorð, ok nam þar land,
ok bió á Hallsteins-nese.

3. Nockorom vettrom síðarr kom út Auðr en Diúp-auðga, ok vas enn
fyrsta vetr með Birne bróðor sínom. Síðan nam hon aoll Dala-laond
[1071] í Breiða-firðe, í miðle Skraumu-hlaups-ár ok Daogorðar-ár,5
ok bió í Hvamme.

4. Á þessom tímom bygðesk allr Breiða-fiaorðr, ok þarf her eige at
segja frá þeirra manna land-naómom es eige koma við þessa saogo.

7. 1. Geirroeðr hét maðr, es nam land inn frá Þórs-aó til10 Langa-dals
[1072], ok bió á Eyre. Með hónom kom út Ulfarr Kappe, es hann gaf land
umb-hverfiss Ulfars-fell: ok Finn­geirr, son Þórsteins Ondors, hann bió
í Alfta-firðe. Hans sonr vas Þórfinnr, faðer Þórbrannz í Alfta-firðe.

2. Vestarr hét maðr, son Þórolfs Bloðro-skalla; hann kom til15 Íslannz
með faoðor sínn gamlan, ok nam land fyr innan Urthvala-fiaorð [1073],
ok bió á Ondorðre-eyre: hans sonr vas Ásgeirr es þar bió síðan.

3. Biaorn enn Austroene andaðesk fyrst þessa landnáms-manna, ok
vas heygðr við Borgar-loek. Hann átte efter tvá sono: annarr vas20
Ceallacr (enn) Gamle, es bió í Biarnar-haofn efter faoðor sínn:
Ceallacr átte Ástríðe dóttor Hrólfs hersess, systor Steinolfs ens
Lága. Þau aótto þriú baorn: Þórgrímr Goðe vas sonr þeirra, ok Gerðr
dótter, es átte Þórmoðr Goðe, son Oddz ens Racka. Þriðja vas Helga,
es átte Ásgeirr á Eyre.--Frá baornom Ceallacs es komen mikel ætt,
ok ero þat kallaðer Ceallekingar. Óttarr hét annarr sonr Biarnar;
hann átte Gró Geirleifs dóttor, systor Oddleifs af Barða-straond:
þeirra syner vóro þeir Helge, faðer Osvifrs ens Spaka; ok Biaorn,
faðer Vígfúss í Draópo-hlíð; Vilgeirr hét enn5 þriðe son Óttars
Biarnar sonar.

4. Þórolfr Mostrar-skegg kvángaðesk í elle sínne, ok feck þeirrar kono
es Uðr [1074] hét; segja sumer at hon være dótter Þórsteins Rauðs; en
Are Þórgils son enn Fróðe telr hána eige með hans baornom. Þau Þórolfr
ok Uðr aótto son es Steinn hét. Þann svein gaf Þórolfr10 Þór vin sínom,
ok kallaðe hann Þór-stein; ok vas þesse sveinn all-bráð-goerr.

5. Hallsteinn Þórolfs son feck Oskar, dóttor Þórsteins Rauðs: Þórsteinn
hét son þeirra; hann fóstraðe Þórolfr, ok kallaðe Þórstein Surt:
en sínn son kallaðe hann Þórstein Þorska-bít [1075].15

8. 1. Í þenna tíma kom út Geirríðr syster Geirroeðar í Eyre, ok
gaf hann henne bústað í Borgar-dale fyr innan Alfta-fiaorð. Hon lét
setja skála sínn á þióð-braut þvera, ok skyldo aller menn ríða þar
í goegnom: þar stóð iamnan borð ok matr á, gefenn hverjom es hafa
vilde. Af slíko þótte hon et mesta20 gaofog-menne [1076].

2. Geirríðe hafðe átta Biaorn son Bolverks Blindinga-trióno, ok hét
þeirra son Þórolfr; hann vas víkingr mikell. Hann kom út noeckoro
síðarr an móðer hans, ok vas með henne enn fyrsta vettr. Þórolfe þótte
þat líteð bú-land, ok skoraðe á Ulfar Kappa til landa,25 ok bauð
hónum holm-gaongo, þvi at hann vas við aldr ok barn-lauss. Ulfarr
vilde heldr deyja an vesa kúgaðr af Þórolfe. Þeir gengo á holm í
Alfta-firðe, ok fell Ulfarr, en Þórolfr varð sárr á foete ok geck
iamnan haltr síðan--af þesso vas hann kallaðr Boege-fótr. [1077]
Hann goerðe bú í Hvamme í Þórsár-dale; hann tók30 laond efter Ulfar,
ok vas enn meste óiafnaðar-maðr. Hann selðe laond leysingjom Þórbrannz
í Alfta-firðe, Ulfare Ulfars-fell, en OErlyge OErlygs-staðe, ok bioggo
þeir þar lenge síðan.

3. Þórolfr Boege-fótr átte þriú baorn. Arnkell hét son hans,
en Gunnfríðr dótter, es átte Þorbeiner á Þorbeinis staoðom inn
á Vatz-halse. [1078] Þeirra syner vóro þeir Sigmundr ok Þórgils;
en hans dótter vas Þórgerðr, es átte Vígfúss í Draópo-hlíð. Onnor
dótter Þórolfs Boege-fótz hét Geirríðr, es átte Þórolfr, son Herjolfs
Hoelkin-raza,5 ok bioggo þau í Máva-hlíð: þeirra baorn vóro þau
Þórarenn Svarte, ok Goðný.

9. 1. Þórolfr Mostrar-skegg andaðesk á Hof-staoðom: þá tók Þórsteinn
Þorska-bítr faoðor-leifð sína: hann geck at eiga Þóro, dóttor Óláfs
Feilans, systor Þórðar10 Gelliss, es þá bió í Hvamme. Þórolfr vas
heygðr í Haugs-nese út frá Hof-staoðom.

2. Í þenna tíma vas svá mikell ofse Ceallekinga, at þeir þóttosk fyre
aoðrom maonnom þar í sveit: vóro þeir ok svá marger ætt-menn Biarnar,
at einge frænda-baolkr vas þá iam-mikell í Breiða-firðe.15 Þá bió
Barna-Ceallacr, frænde þeirra, á Meðalfellz-straond þar sem nú heiter
á Ceallacs-staoðom; hann átte marga sono ok vel menta; þeir veitto
aller frændom sínom fyr sunnan fiaorðenn á þingom ok mann-fundom.

3. Þat vas eitt vár á Þórsness-þinge, at þeir mágar, Þórgrímr20
Ceallacs son ok Ásgeirr á Eyre, goerðo orð á, at þeir moende eige
leggja drag under of-metnað Þórsnesinga í því [1079], at þeir moende
eige ganga oerna sínna þar á grase sem annars-staðar á mann-fundom,
þó þeir være svá stollz, at þeir goerðe laond sín helgare an aðrar
iarðer í Breiða-firðe. Lýsto þeir þá yfir því, at þeir moende eige25
troða skó til at ganga þar í út-sker til alf-reka. En es Þórsteinn
Þorska-bítr varð þessa varr, vilde hann eige þola, at þeir saurgaðe
þann vaoll, es Þórolfr, faðer hans, hafðe tignat um framm aðra staðe
í sínne land-eign: heimte hann þá at ser vine sína, ok ætlaðe at
verja þeim víge vaollenn, ef þeir hygðesk at saurga hann. At þesso
ráðe hurfo með hónom, Þórgeirr Cengr [1080] son Girroeðar á5 Eyre;
ok Alftfirðingar, Þórfinnr ok Þórbrandr son hans [1081]; Þórolfr
Boege-fótr; ok marger aðrer þing-menn Þórsteins ok viner. En um
kveldet es Ceallekingar vóro metter, tóko þeir vaópn sín, ok gengo út í
neset. En es þeir Þórsteinn saó, at þeir menn snoero af þeim veg es til
skersens lá, þá hliópo þeir til vápna, ok runno efter10 þeim með ópe ok
eggjan. Ok es Ceallekingar saó þat, hliópo þeir saman ok vaórðo sik;
en Þórsnesingar goerðo svá harða at-gaongo, at Ceallekingar hrucko
af vellenom, ok í fiaorona; snoerosk þeir þá við, ok varð þar enn
harðaste bardaga [1082] með þeim. Ceallekingar vóro fære, ok haofðo
ein-vala lið. Nú verða við varer Skógstrendingar,15 Þórgestr enn
Gamle ok Áslákr or Langa-dale; þeir hliópo til ok gengo í miðle; en
hvárer-tveggjo vóro ener óðosto; ok fengo eige skilt þá, áðr an þeir
héto at veita þeim, es þeirra orð vilde heyra til skilnaðarens. Ok
við þat urðo þeir skilðer; ok þó með því móte, at Ceallekingar naóðo
eige at ganga upp á vaollenn;20 ok stigo þeir á skip, ok fóro braut af
þingeno. Þar fello menn af hvaórom-tveggjom, ok fleire af Ceallekingom;
en fiolðe varð sárr. Griðom varð oengom á komet, þvi at hváreger vildo
þau selja; ok héto hvárer aoðrom at-faorom, þegar es því mætte við
koma. Vaollrenn vas orðenn al-blóðegr, þar es þeir baorðosk, ok svá
þar es Skóg-strendingar [1083] stóðo meðan barzk vas.

10. 1. Efter þinget haofðo hvárer-tveggjo setor fiol-mennar, ok vóro
þá dylgjor miklar með þeim. Viner þeirra5 tóko þat ráð, at senda
efter Þórðe Gelle, es þá vas mestr haofðinge í Breiða-firðe: hann
vas frænde Ceallekinga, en ná-mágr Þórsteins; þótte hann glíkastr
til at sætta þá. En es Þórðe kom þesse orð­sending, fór hann til við
marga menn ok leitar um sætter; fann hann, at stórum langt [1084]
vas á miðlom þeirra þyckjo; en þó feck10 hann komet á griðom með þeim
ok stefno-lage. Þar urðo þær mála-lykðer, at Þórðr skylde goera um,
með því móte, at Ceallekingar skilðo þat til [1085], at þeir mundo
alldrige ganga í Drit-sker oerna sínna: en Þórsteinn skoraðe þat í, at
Ceallekingar skyldo eige saurga vaollenn nú heldr an fyr. Ceallekingar
kaolloðo alla þá hafa15 fallet óhelga, es fyre Þórsteine haofðo fallet,
fyrer þat es þeir haofðo fyrr með þann hug at þeim faret at berjask. En
Þórsnesingar saogdo Ceallekinga alla óhelga fyre laga-brot þat es þeir
goerðo á helgoðo þinge. En þó at vandlega være under skilt goerðena, þá
iáttaðe Þórðr at goera, ok vilde heldr þat, an þeir skilðe ósátter.20

2. Þórðr hafðe þat upp-haf goerðarennar, at hann kallar, at sá
skal hafa happ es hloteð hefer; kvað þar enge víg boeta skolo,
þau es orðet haofðo í Þórsnese, eðr áverka; en vaollenn kallar hann
spiltan af heiftar-blóðe es niðr hafðe komet, ok kallar þá iaorð nú
eige helgare an aðra; ok kallar þá því valda, es fyrre goerðosk til5
áverka við aðra. Kallaðe hann þat frið-brot frameð [1086]. Sagðe þar
ok eige þing skyldo vesa síðan.

3. En til þess, at þeir være vel sátter ok viner þaðan af, þá goerðe
hann þat, at Þórgrímr Ceallaks son skylde halda upp hofeno at helminge,
ok hafa halfan hof-toll, ok svá þing-menn at helminge;10 veita ok
Þórsteine til allra mála þaðan af, ok styrkja hann til, hverega helge
sem hann vill á leggja þinget þar sem næst verðe sett. Her með gifte
Þórðr Geller Þórgríme Ceallaks syne Þórhilde [1087] frænd-kono sína,
dóttor Þórkels Meinakrs nábua sína. Vas hann af því kallaðr Þórgrímr
Goðe.15

4. Þeir foerðo þá þinget inn í neset þar sem nú es. [1088] Ok þá es
Þórðr Gellir skipaðe fiórðunga-þing, lét hann þar vesa fiórðungs-þing
Vestfirðinga: skyldo menn þangat til soekja um alla Vest­fiaorðo
[1089]: þar sér enn dóm-hríng þann es menn vóro doemðer í til
blótz. [1090] Í þeim hring stendr Þórs-steinn es þeir menn vóro
brotner20 um es til blóta vóro hafðer; ok sér enn blóðs-litenn á
steinenom. Vas á því þinge enn enn meste helge-staðr; en eige vas
maonnom þar bannat at ganga oerna sínna þar á grase sem vilde [1091].

11. 1. Þórsteinn Þorska-bítr goerðesk enn meste rausnar-maðr;
hann hafðe með ser iamnan sex tige frelsingja; hann vas mikell
at-drátta-maðr, ok vas iamnan í5 fiske-róðrom.

2. Hann lét fyrst reisa boeenn at Helga-felle, ok foerðe þangat bú
sítt, ok vas þar enn meste haofoð-staðr [1092] í þat mund. Hann lét
ok boe goera þar í neseno, nær því [1093] sem þinget hafðe veret
[1094]. Þann boe lét hann ok miok vanda, ok gaf hann síðan Þórsteine
Surt10 frænda sínum: bió hann þar síðan, ok varð enn meste spekingr
at vite. Þórsteinn Þorska-bítr átte son es kallaðr vas Borkr enn Digre.

3. En sumar þat es Þórsteinn vas half-þrítoegr, foedde Þóra svein-barn,
ok vas Grímr nefnðr, es vatne vas ausenn: þann svein gaf Þórsteinn Þór,
ok kvað vesa skyldo hof-goða, ok kallar hann Þórgrím.15

4. Þat sama haust fór Þórsteinn út í Haoscullz-ey til fangs. Þat
vas eitt kveld um hausteð, at sauða-maðr Þórsteins fór at fé fyr
norðan Helga-fell: hann sá, at fiallet lauksk upp norðan; hann sá
inn í fiallet elda stóra, ok heyrðe hann þangat mikenn glaum ok
horna-skvol: ok es hann hlýdde ef hann næme noeckor20 orða-skil,
heyrðe hann at þar vas heilsat Þórsteine Þorska-bít ok faoro-nautom
hans, ok mælt, at hann skal sitja í aondoge gegnt feðr sínom. Þenna
fyreburð sagðe sauða-maðr Þóro, kono Þórsteins, um kveldet. Hon lét ser
fátt um finnask, ok kallar vesa mega, at þetta være fyre-boðan stoerre
tíðenda. Um morgonenn efter kómo menn útan or Haoscullz-ey, ok saogðo
þau tíðende, at Þórsteinn Þorska-bítr hofðe drucknat í fiske-róðre;
ok þótte maonnom þat mikell skaðe. Þóra hélt þar bú efter, ok ræzk
sá maðr til með5 henne es Hallvarðr hét. Þau aótto son es Márr hét.







1. 1. Cetil Flat-neb was the name of a noble lord or herse in
Norway. He was the son of Beorn Buna, son of Grim herse or lord of
Sogn. Cetil Flat-neb was married. He had to wife Yngw-hild, daughter
of Cetil Wether, herse or lord of Rauma-ric. Beorn and Helge were
their sons' names, and their daughters were these: Aud the Deep-rich,
Thor-und Hyrna, and Ior-wen Mann-wits-brecca. Beorn, the son of Cetil,
was fostered in the east in Iamta-land [?] with a certain earl, whose
name was Ceallac, a wise man and noble. The earl had a son named Beorn,
and his daughter's name was Giav-laug [Geibhleach].

2. It came to pass at that time that king Harold Fairhair came to the
kingdom of Norway. Because of the unpeace or civil war many well-born
men fled from their heritages out of Norway, some eastward over the
Keel, some west over the Sea [North Sea]. There were some that used
to keep themselves of a winter in the Southreys [Sodor Isles] or
Orkneys, and of a summer they would harry in Norway, and do much harm
in Harold's kingdom. The franklins brought the matter before the king,
and prayed him to free them from this unpeace or civil war. Then king
Harold decided to fit out a host to go west over the Sea, saying that
Cetil Flat-neb should be captain of this host. Cetil excused himself,
but the king said he must go. And when Cetil saw that the king would
have his way, he made ready for the journey, and took with him his
wife and all those of his children who were still with him.

3. And when Cetil came to the west over the Sea, he had certain battles
there, and ever he won the day. He conquered the Southreys and made
himself chief over them. Moreover he made peace and covenants with the
greatest chiefs west of the Sea, and entered in the bonds of affinity,
and sent his host back eastward again. And when they came before king
Harold they said that Cetil Flat-neb was a chief in the Southreys,
but they said they could not see that it would much forward king
Harold's rule west of the Sea. And when the king heard this, then he
took to himself all the property that Cetil owned in Norway.

4. Cetil Flat-neb gave Aud his daughter in marriage to Olaf the White,
the greatest king-of-a-host west over the Sea. He was the son of
Ingi-ald, Helge's son, and Ingi-ald's mother was Thora, daughter of
Sigurd Snake i' the Eye, son of Ragn-here Lod-broc. Thor-wen Hyrna he
gave to Helge the Thin, the son of Ey-wind East-man, and of Rafurta,
daughter of Cearval, the king of the Irish.

2. 1. Beorn, son of Cetil Flat-neb, was in Iamta-land [?] till
earl Ceallac died. He took to wife Giav-laug [Geibhleach], the
earl's daughter, and then went from the east over the Keel first to
Thrond-ham, and then southwards and took possession of the property
which his father had had, and drove away the reeves whom king Harold
had set over it.

2. When he heard news of this, king Harold was in the Wick, and he
went by the upper road [by land] northward to Thrond-ham, and when he
was come to Thrond-ham he summoned the Eight-folk-moot; and at that
moot he made Beorn, Cetil's son, an outlaw in Norway, making him a
man to be killed or taken wherever he was found. Moreover he sent Hawk
High-breech and other of his champions to slay him if they could meet
with him. And when they were come south of Staad [Cape Stadt], Beorn's
friends were ware of their journeying and gave him news thereof. Then
Beorn ran to a galley that he had, with his household and chattels,
and went off southward along the land, for it was then the depth of
winter, and he did not dare to put to sea.

3. Beorn went on till he came to the island that is called Mostr, which
lies off South Horda-land, and there a man received him whose name was
Thor-wolf, the son of Erne-wolf Fish-driver [the whale fisher]. Beorn
was there through the winter in hiding. The king's men turned back
when they had taken order for Beorn's property and set men to keep it.

3. 1. Thor-wolf was a great chief, and kept up the greatest estate. He
kept the Temple of Thunder there in the island, and was a great friend
of Thunder, wherefore he was called Thor-wolf. He was a big man and
strong, fair to look on, and he had a big beard, wherefore he was
called Mostr-beardie. He was the best-born man in the island.

2. In the spring Thor-wolf gave Beorn a good war-ship and manned it
with a good crew, and gave him his son Hall-stan to be with him on the
way; and they put to sea, going west to make for Beorn's kinsmen. But
when king Harold heard that Thor-wolf Mostr-beardie had kept Beorn,
Cetil's son, the king's outlaw, he sent his command to him to forbid
him the land, bidding him go into exile like Beorn his friend,
unless he would come and seek the king, and submit the whole case to
his ruling.

3. That was ten winters after Ing-wolf Erneson had gone to settle
Iceland. And this journey of his was become widely reported, because
the men who came from Iceland said that there was a good choice of
land there.

4. 1. Thor-wolf Mostr-beardie made ready a great sacrifice, and went
in and sought an oracle of Thunder, his beloved friend, whether he
should make terms with the king, or leave the country and seek him
another career. But the oracle directed Thor-wolf to Iceland. And
after that he got himself a great sea-ship, and fitted her out for
the Iceland voyage, and took aboard with him his household and his
chattels. Many of his friends ventured on the voyage with him. He
took down the temple, and most of the timber that had been in it he
took with him, and also the earth under the altar [1095].

2. Then Thor-wolf sailed to sea, and had fair winds, and made the
land, and sailed up along the south-westward round Reek-ness. Then
the fair wind fell, and they could see that the land was cut into
deep friths. Then Thor-wolf cast overboard his porch-pillars that
had stood in the temple (Thunder was carven upon one of them); and as
he did so, he declared that he would settle in Iceland at the place
where Thunder let them come on shore. And immediately they drifted
from the ship, and swept into the west of the bay, and they seemed
to go faster than could be looked for. After that the sea breeze
came up, and they sailed west round Snow-fell-ness, and in up the
frith. They could see that the frith was wonderfully broad and deep,
and very full of high fells on both sides. Thor-wolf gave the frith a
name, and called it Broad-frith. He neared the land on the south of
the frith near the middle, and put the ship into the bay that they
afterwards called Temple-bay.

3. After that they explored the land, and upon the uttermost part
of the point, that is on the north of the bay, they found that
Thunder was come ashore with the pillars. It was afterwards called
Thor's-ness. After that Thor-wolf bore the fire round his settlement,
starting inward from Staff-water, and landward to the water which he
called Thor's-water, and he gave settlements to his mariners there. He
set up a homestead on Temple-bay, which he called Temple-stead. He
set up a temple there, and it was a big house.

4. Thor-wolf called [all] between Wigre-frith and Temple-bay
Thor's-ness. On this ness there stands a hill. This hill Thor-wolf
had in such great reverence that no man might look thereon [pray
towards it] unwashen, and there might be no destruction of anything,
man or beast, on this hill, save the creature come off it of its own
accord. This hill he called Holy-fell, and he believed that he should
go into it when he died and all his kinsmen on the ness.

5. On the ness, where Thunder had come ashore, he had all the courts
held, and set the hered-moot. There was such a sanctuary there also,
that he would by no means let the field be befouled withal, neither
with feud-blood [blood shed in anger], and there might be no elf-drive
[excrement] passed there, but for this purpose there was a reef
appointed which was called Dirt-reef.

6. Thor-wolf set up the greatest estate in his homestead, and kept
a great household about him; for there was then good meat in plenty
to be got from the eggs [MS. islands] and other gettings from the sea.

5. 1. Now it is right to take up the tale of Beorn Cetil,
Flat-neb's son--how he sailed westward over sea, what time he and
Thor-wolf Mostr-beardie parted, as was said before. He made for the
Southreys. But when he was come west over sea his father Cetil was
already dead, but he found Helge his brother there and his sisters,
and they offered him good terms if he would stay with them.

2. But Beorn found out that they had another worship, and he thought
it a craven thing that they had thrown over the old way which their
kinsmen had held, and he could not rest there, and would not make
his abode there. Nevertheless he stayed the winter over with Aud
his sister, and Thor-stan her son. But when they found that he would
not make his home with his kinsfolk, then they called him Beorn the
Eastron, and did like it ill that he would not make his abode there.

6. 1. Beorn was two winters in the Southreys before he made ready
for his voyage to Iceland. With him on this voyage was Hall-stan,
Thor-wolf's son. They neared the land at Broad-frith, and he [Beorn]
took up his settlement, beginning from the sea at Staff-water, between
it and Hraun's-frith, under the counsel of Thor-wolf. Beorn dwelt in
Borg-holt at Beorn's-haven. He was the best-born of men.

2. Hall-stan, Thor-wolf's son, thought it craven to receive land
from his father, and he went westward over Broad-frith, and took up
a settlement there, and dwelt at Hall-stan's-ness.

3. Some winters later Aud the Deep-rich came out, and the first winter
she was with Beorn her brother. Afterwards she took in settlement
all the Dale-lands in Broad-frith between Scream-leap's-water and
Day-meal's-water, and dwelt at Hwamm.

4. It was in these days that all Broad-frith was settled [c. 900]. And
it is no use here telling forth the settlements of them that do not
come into this History.

7. 1. Gar-rod was the name of a man that took land in settlement
inwards from Thor's-water to Lang-dale, and lived at Eyre. With him
came out Wolf-here the Champion, to whom he gave land round about
Wolf-here's-fell, and Finn-gar the son of Thor-stan Snow-skate. He
[Finn-gar] dwelt at Elfet's-frith. His son was Thor-finn, father of
Thor-brand o' Elfet's-frith.

2. West-here was the name of a man, the son of Thor-wolf
Bladder-sack. He came to Iceland with his old father, and took up a
settlement inside of Urc-whale-frith [MS. Urt-whale-frith], and dwelt
at Endworth-eyre. His son was As-geirr, who dwelt there afterwards.

3. Beorn the Eastron died first of these settlers, and was put in a
howe over against Borg-leak [or beck]. He left two sons behind him. One
of them was Ceallac the Elder, who dwelt in Beorn's-haven after his
father. [The next lines are given in Ld., II. 8, 9, which see.]

4. Thor-wolf Mostr-beardie took a wife in his old age, and married
a wife whose name was Und. Some say that she was the daughter of
Thor-stan the Red, but Are Thor-gils's son the historian does not
reckon her with her children. Thor-wolf and Und had a son named
Stan. This boy Thor-wolf dedicated to Thunder his friend and called
him Thor-stan, and the boy was very quick of growth.

5. Hall-stan, Thor-wolf's son, took to wife Osc, daughter of Thor-stan
the Red. Thor-stan was the name of their son. Thor-wolf fostered
him and called him Thor-stan the Black, but his own son he called
Thor-stan Torsk-biter [biter of codfish].

8. 1. At that time came out Gar-rid, sister of Gar-rod of Eyre. [For
the next few lines, see Ld., II. 11.]

9. 1. Thor-wolf Mostr-beardie died at Temple-stead, and Thor-stan
Torsk-biter took his heritage. He proceeded to marry Thora, daughter
of Anlaf Feilan, sister of Thord Gelle, who dwelt in Hwamm in those
days. Thor-wolf was put in a howe at Howe's-ness, to the seaward
of Temple-stead.

2. In those days the pride of Ceallacings was so great that they
thought themselves above every one else in the neighbourhood, and
there were so many of Beorn's kinsmen that there was no other kindred
in Broad-frith as big. Beorn-Ciallac their kinsman then dwelt in
Mid-fell-stand, at the place now called Ceallac's-stead; he had many
sons, and they were of good report. They all upheld their kinsmen on
the south of the frith at moots and assemblies.

3. It happened one spring at Thor's-ness moot that these two
brothers-in-law, Thor-grim Ceallac's son, and As-gar o' Eyre,
declared that they would not smooth the way for the pride of the
Thor's-ness-men, and that they would do their business as elsewhere
at assemblies on the grass, in spite of their pride in setting up
their land as more holy than any other earth in Broad-frith. They
let it be known that they would not wear out their shoes in going
out to the sea-reef to elf-drive. But when Thor-stan Torsk-biter got
to hear of this, he would not suffer them to befoul the field that
Thor-wolf his father had honoured above all places on his estate,
and he gathered to him his friends, and determined to keep the field
against them by battle if they showed intent to befoul it. There
took part with him in this plan Thor-geir Ceng, the son of Gar-rod
o' Eyre, and the Elfet's-frith-men, Thor-fin and Thor-brand his
son, Thor-wolf Cripple-foot, and many other moot-men and friends of
Thor-stan. And about the evening, when the Ceallacings had had their
moot, they took their weapons and went out into the ness. And when
Thor-stan and his men saw that they turned out of the way that lay
to the reef, they sprang to their weapons, and ran after them with
whoops and abuse. And when the Ceallacings saw it, they ran together
and defended themselves; but the Thor's-ness-men made such a hard
onslaught, that the Ceallacings gave back out of the field down to
the fore-shore. There they turned again upon them, and there was the
hardest battle between them. The Ceallacings were the fewer, but they
had a picked company. But by this time the Shaw-strand-men got to
know of it, Thor-gest the Old and Oslac o' Lang-dale. They ran up and
went between them, but on both sides they were as mad as could be,
and they could not get them parted, till they promised to stand by
the side that would hearken to their words and withdraw apart. And
so they were parted, but on the condition that the Ceallacings were
not able to go up into the field, and so they took ship and went
away from the moots. Men fell there from both sides, but more of the
Ceallacings, and there was a multitude of wounded. They could not
come to a truce, because neither of them would grant it, but each of
them declared that they would attack the others directly they could
come across them. The field was made very bloody when they fought,
and also where the Shaw-strand-men [MS. Thor's-ness-men] stood while
the battle was going on.

10. 1. After the moot each side kept up a great gathering, and there
was at the time deadly hatred between them. Their friends took the
plan of sending for Thord Gelle, who was then the greatest chief in
Broad-frith. He was a kinsman of the Ceallacings, and of near kin by
marriage to Thor-stan; he was thought the most likely man to make peace
between them. But when Thord got their message, he went forth thither
with many men behind him and sought to make peace; but he found that
there was a very great difference between the two parties' wishes:
nevertheless he brought about a truce between them and a meeting. The
end of the case was that Thord was chosen to make terms, or arbitrate
on the understanding that the Ceallacings had their way in this, that
they would never do their business at Dirt-skerry; and that Thor-stan
stipulated that the Ceallacings should not befoul the plain any more
than they had before. The Ceallacings held that all those who had
fallen on Thor-stan's side had fallen in guilt, because they had first
come forth against them with intent to battle. But the Thor's-ness-men
said that all the Ceallacings were in guilt, because of the breach of
law they committed at a hallowed moot. And though the terms on both
sides were so nice, yet Thord consented to act as day's-man, for he
would rather do so than that they should part without being at peace.

2. Thord began his arbitration by saying 'he who gets the lot must
have the luck' [beati possidentes], and that there should be no boot
paid for any manslaughters done at Thor's-ness, or for any assault;
and he declared that the field was defiled by the feud-blood that had
fallen thereon; and declared that the earth there now was no more holy
than any other; and he declared that the blame lay on them who first
committed the assault upon the others, and that this was a breach of
the peace; and that there should no moot be held there afterwards.

3. And further, in order that they should be in firm peace and good
friends henceforward, he gave as award that Thor-grim Ceallac's son
should keep up the Temple half of it, and have half the Temple-toll and
also half of the moot-men; that he should further uphold Thor-stan in
all suits henceforward, and give him his support whatsoever hallowing
he would lay upon the new moot which was to be set up. Moreover Thord
Gelle gave his kinswoman Thor-hild, a daughter of Thor-kel Mein-acre
his neighbour, to Thor-grim Ceallac's son, to wife. And ever after
this he was called Thor-grim the gode.

4. Then they moved the moot up the country into the ness where it is
now. And at the time when Thord Gelle created the Quarter-moots, he
made this to be the Quarter-moot of the West-frith-men, and thither
should men from all the West-friths seek. There is still to be seen
the doom-ring wherein men were doomed to sacrifice. In this ring
stands Thunder's stone, on which the men that were to be sacrificed
were broken; and there is still to be seen the blood-stain on the
stone. This moot-stead was a most hallowed place, albeit men were
not forbidden to do their business there on the grass as they would.

11. 1. Thor-stan Torsk-biter kept up the greatest estate. He always
had three-score freed-men about him. He was a great man for laying
up stores, and was always out at sea fishing.

2. He was the first to build the homestead at Holy-fell; and flitted
his homestead there, and it was the finest of great houses at that
time. He also had a homestead put up on the ness near where the moot
had been before. He also took great pains with this homestead, and then
he gave it to Thor-stan Swart his kinsman, who dwelt there afterwards
and became a very great sage for wisdom. Thor-stan Torsk-biter had
a son who was called Baurc the Fat.

3. And the summer in which Thor-stan was twenty-five years old,
Thora bare a man-child, and he was named Grim when he was sprinkled
with water. Thor-stan dedicated this boy to Thor, and declared that
he should be a temple priest, and called him Thor-grim.

4. That same harvest-tide Thor-stan went out fishing to
Haus-coll's-ey. It came to pass one evening in the harvest-tide that
Thor-stan's shepherd was tending his sheep on the north of Holy-fell;
and he saw that the hill stood open on the north side. He could see
inside in the hill great fires, and could hear a great chinking and
clatter of horns there. And as he listened to try and catch some
word clearly, he heard greeting given to Thor-stan Torsk-biter and
his mates, and he heard it said that he was to sit in the high seat
over against his father. This portent the shepherd told to Thora,
Thor-stan's wife, in the evening. She did not say much when she
heard it, but considered that may-be it was a foreboding of greater
news. And next morning men came ashore from Haus-coll's-ey and told
these tidings, that Thor-stan Torsk-biter had been drowned a-fishing,
and men thought this a sore blow. Thora kept her homestead there
afterwards, and a certain man, whose name was Hall-ward, helped her
[as reeve]. They had a son who was called Mar.










CHAPTER 4

§ 4. MANTISSA.


In John Erlendsson's copy of Hawk's-book, he breaks off at the
bottom of a leaf at the end of the passage about Earl Rognwald,
leaving ten leaves blank, in sign that there was a leaf or leaves
missing in his original. On the other hand, calculation shows that
what he has written squares with a whole leaf of Hawk's-book. But
it would appear that when the book was in Biorn o' Scardsa's hands,
this missing leaf was still existing. It is from his compilation
that we have got therefore what remained of Mantissa: AM. 104,
Asgar's transcript, from an autograph of Biorn's, is the best copy,
and upon this our text of chs. 3-6 is founded.

The pedigrees which are here restored to Mantissa show by their
reference to Hawk that they must have stood in Hawk's-book.

The mistake which gave the first part of Mantissa to the end of
Christni Saga, owing to the erroneous following of John Erlendsson's
copy, is here for the first time corrected. Hence chs. 1-2 are here
drawn from the Christni Saga transcript, with some corrections due
to Biorn o' Scardsa. The rest (chs. 3-6) are drawn from Biorn's copy.

Chapter 1. 1 is also found inserted into Hungrvaca (h).

We now think that Lawman Hawk (he or the compiler of Christni Saga)
had in hand a copy of a fragment of Libellus, containing the last two
chapters thereof, along with an appendix or continuation as it were,
to which again are added sundry entries, partly touching Iceland,
partly Norway.

The name 'Mantissa' was coined by an editor at the end of the last
century. In the edition of 1688 and in Arne Magnusson's time, it is
called 'Appendix.' Chronologically it is an appendage to Libellus,
though it has come down appended to a Christni Saga MS.; the contents,
however, best fit Landnama-book.

The original probably stood to Liber or Libellus as the Continuation
does to Bæda's Church History, and like it is made up of notes and
additions of annalistic character. Its contents are:--



    Ch. 1. Annals, 1118-19, 1121.
    Ch. 2. Chronologic note, which is partly unfinished; perhaps a
    leaf is lost here.
    Ch. 3. On the two great Famines in Iceland.
    Ch. 4. On Bearne's Hall.
    Ch. 5. Pedigrees.
    Ch. 6. List of early Bishops, parallel to that in Libellus.



The pedigrees of ch. 5 are not all translated, as they will be found
tabulated below with the other genealogies of this volume.






[A. D. 1118.]


1. 1. Á Því áre es Gizorr byscop andaðesk, goerðe hallære miket á
Íslande. Þá kom hríð sú á Dymbil-daogom, at menn maótto eige veita
tíðer í kirkjom í sumom heroðom fyr norðan land. En Faosto-dag enn
Langa þá hóf upp knaorr under Eyja-fiaollom, ok snoere á lofte,
ok kom holfande niðr: hann vas5 siau rúm ok tottogo. Páska-dag enn
fyrsta maótto fáer menn tíðer soekja at taka corpus domini [1096];
en sumer urðo úte dauðer.

Annat íll-viðre (varð) efter andlát hans þann dag es menn riðo á þing
[1097]; ok drap fé manna fyr norðan land [1098]: þá braut kirkjo á
Þingvelle, þá es Haralldr konungr Sigurðar son hafðe láteð hoeggva10
viðenn til.

Þat sumar fóro xxxv skipa út hingat, ok braut maorg víð land; en sum
leyste í hafe under maonnom; en átta ein kómosk braut með þeim es
áðr vóro her; ok kómosk þau enge fyrer Michials-messo or hafe. Af
þeim mann-fiaolða varð her hallære miket.15

2. Einom vetre efter andlát Gizorar byscops vas Þórsteinn Hallvarz
son vegenn, gaofogr maðr.

3. En vetre efter þat vas þing fiol-ment. Þau missere hafðe svá
mikell mann-dauðr vereð, at Sæmundr prestr enn Fróðe sagðe svá á
þinge, at eige moende fære menn hafa andask af sótt, an þá5 vóro til
þings komner.

Þat sumar vas þroeng mikel at dómom. Þá særðe Þórgils Odda son Hafliða
Márs son. Þá varð um ecki mál at laogom doemt. Þórgils varð sekr um
áverkann, ok sat í sekð um vetrenn.

4. Þá vas svá lítill vápna-burðr, at ein vas stál-húfa þá á Alþinge;10
ok reið driúgom hverr bónde til þings es þá vas á Íslande.

5. Enn vas þat es þrír vetr vóro liðner frá andláte Gizorar byscops,
andaðesk Ioan byscop at Hólom ... [1099] kal. Maij.

6. Þat sumar reið Hafliðe Márs son á þing með m.cc. manna; en Þórgils
Odda son með dcc. manna. Þeir sættosk á þinge með15 því, at Þórgils
selde Hafliða sialf-doeme. En hann goerðe sex tige hundraða sex alna
aura vaoro-virtz feár: lúka í golle eða brendo silfre, eða soemelegom
gripom: skylde hann virða sialfr Hafliðe, eða þeir es hann toeke til.

Þat sumar vas kiorenn [1100] til byscops Ketill Þórsteins son af
Maoðro-vaollom20 í stað Ioans byscops; ok fór hann útan þat sumar.

7. Hafliðe Márs son átte fyrr Þórríðe, dóttor Þórðar Sturlo sonar:
Þórðr hét son þeirra; hann átte Solvaoro, dóttor Ásgríms Þórhallz
sonar. Ívarr hét son þeirra. Hafliðe átte síðarr Rann­veigo, dóttor
Teitz or Hauka-dale: Sigríðr hét dótter þeirra; es átte Þórðr í
Vatz-firðe. Snorre [1101] ok Páll vóro syner þeirra. Val­gerðr5 hét
aonnor dótter þeirra Hafliða: hána átte Ingimundr prestr, Illoga
son ok Orno, dóttor Þórkels Gellis sonar: Illoge vas son þeirra, es
drucknaðe þá es hann flutte ... [1102] lím til stein-kirkjo þeirrar,
es hann ætlaðe at goera á Breiða-bólstað í Vestr-hópe.

2. 1. Rognvallðr iarl Kale vas vegenn v nóttom efter10 Mário-messo
fyrre.

2. En Oláfr konungr Tryggva son barðesk á Orme'nom Langa nesta dag
efter Mário-messo. [1103]

3. 1. Oaldar-vetr varð mikill á Íslande í heiðne, í þann tíma es
Haraldr konungr Gráfelldr fell, en Hákon15 iarl tók ríke í Norege. Sá
hefer mestr orðet á Íslande. Þá aóto menn hrafna ok mel-racka; ok
maorg ó-átan íll vas eten; en sumer léto drepa gamal-menne ok ómaga;
ok hrinda fyr hamra. Þá sulto marger menn til bana; en sumer laogðosk
út at stela, ok urðo fyre þat seker ok dræper [1104]. Þá vaógosk
skógar-menn sialfer,20 þvi at þat vas laog-teket, at ráðe Eyjolfs
Valgerðar sonar, at hverr frelste sik sa es þriá dræpe sekja.

2. Átta tegom vetra síðarr varð annat ó-áran: þat hófsk þann vetr es
Ísleifr tók byscops-vígslo af Alberto Brima-byscope; en þat vas um
daga Harallz konungs Sigurðar sonar. Enn fyrsta [1105] vetr es Ísleifr
byscop vas á Íslande, vas mann-dauðr [1106] sem mestr á Íslande af
sulte: þá vas allt eteð þat es taonn feste á. En um sumaret lét5 byscop
því heita á þinge, at menn skyldo fasta enn Tolfta dag Ióla um þriú
aór: þvi at svá vas goert í Herfurðu þar es byscop hafðe í scola vereð
á Saxlande. Þá vas svá snæ-miket hver-vetna, at menn gengo flester
til Alþingiss. En es heiteð vas, batnaðe þegar veðrátta, ok varð sumar
et bazta; en vetrenn efter vas svá góðr,10 at einge kom þele í iaorð;
ok gengo menn ber-foetter til tíða um Iól; en húsaðo ok laogðo garða
á Þorra. Et næsta sumar efter vas þat laog-teket, at iamnan skylde
fasta enn tolfta dag Ióla, ef eige bære á Dróttens-dag.--Son Ísleifs
vas Gizorr byscop.

4. 1. Biarne Skegg-brodda son sótte elde-hús-við í15 Norege, ok
goerðe eld-hús í Krossa-vík, half-fertoegt faoðmom; en xiiij alna
hátt ok xiiij alna breitt--hann vas því kallaðr Biarne Hús-langr. Hann
drucknaðe með siaunda mann á Skialfanda, es hann fór til þings.

2. Brodde Þóris son, bróðor son Biarna Húslangs, foerðe skálann20 mikla
or Krossa-vík til Hofs, ok lét þar upp goera. Hann vas þá half-þrítoegr
faoðmom, ok xiij alna breiðr, ok xiij alna hárr. Brodde vas enn meste
ágætis-maðr, ok varð fé-lauss; hann fór þá vestr til Hóla í Hialta-dal
til Ketils byscops Þórsteins-sonar, ok andaðesk þar með hónom.

5. 1. Sigurðr, son Sigmundar konungs, es kallaðr vas Fáfnes-bane,
ok Brynhildr Buðla dótter aótto dóttor5 þá es Áslaug hét; hon
vas foedd með Heime iarle í Hlymdaolom [1107] þar til es hann var
drepenn. Ragnarr Loðbrók, son Sigurðar Hrings, átte Þóro, dóttor
Herrauðar Gauta-iarls: þeirra baorn vóro þau Agnarr, ok Eirikr,
ok Álof, es átte Hunda-Steinarr Engla-earl. Þeirra son var Biaorn,
faðer Auðunnar Skokuls, faoðor Þóro10 Mos-hals, móðor Ulfhildar,
er átte Guðbrandr Kúla: þeirra dótter Ásta, móðer Óláfs konungs
ens Helga. Annarr son Hunda-Steinars ok Álofar hét Eirikr; hann var
faðer Sigurðar Bióða-skalla, f. Víkinga-Kára, f. þeirra Baoðvars ok
Vígfúss, ok Eiriks á Ofrostoðom, f. Ástríðar, m. Óláfs konungs Tryggva
sonar. Dótter15 Vígfúss vas Ástríðr, móðer Víga-Glúms, f. Vígfúss,
f. Bergs, f. Steinunnar, m. Þórsteins Ranglátz, f. Guðrúnar, m. Haollo,
m. Flosa, f. Valgerðar, m. Herra Erlendz Logmannz, f. Herra Hauks. Álof
hét dótter Baoðvars hersiss, er átte Teitr Ketilbiarnar son frá
Mosfelle: þeirra son Gizurr Hvíte, f. Ísleifs byscops, f. Gizurar20
byscops.--Ragnarr Loðbrók átte síðarr Áslaugu, d. Sigurðar Fáfnis-bana;
Sigurðr Ormr-í-auga var son þeirra, ok Hvítserkr, ok Biaorn Iarn-síða,
ok Ívarr hinn Beinlause, ok Ragnhildr.

2. Halfdan Svarte, Upplendinga konungr, son Guðroeðar Lióma, átte Þóro,
dóttor Harallz Gollskeggs Sygna-konungs ok Solvarar25 Húnolfs dóttor
iarls or Fiorðom, systor Atla iarls ens Mióva. Son þeirra Halfdanar
ok Þóro vas Haraldr. En es hann vas ungr, þá andaðesk móðer hans,
en sveinnenn lítlo síðarr. Lítlo síðarr feck Halfdan Ragnildar,
dóttor Sigurðar Hiartar: móðer Sigurðar vas Áslaug, dótter Sigurðar
Orms-í-auga: þeirra son var Haraldr enn30 Hárfagre. En þá er hann vas
tio vetra, þá drucknaðe Halfdan faðer hans á Hringa-ríke í vatne því
Rond heiter, es hann ok efter ísenom; þá brast íssenn es hann kom á
nauta-brunna fyre Svez-stoðom í Rykin-vík; ok drucknaðe hann þar ok
allt lið hans; tók þá Haraldr konungs-nafn. En þá es hann vas tvítoegr,
þá lagðe hann fyrst under sik Sygna-fylke; en Atle iarl hafðe aldrige
skatt goldet. En síðan lagðe hann under sik allan Noreg; sem seger
í Saogo hans.

3. Víkarr hét konungr son, Harallz Egða-konungs: hans son5 vas Vatnarr
konungr, sá es haug á fyr sunnan Hákonar-hello. Einn kaup-maðr í
Norege vas sá es sagðe saogo Vatnars es þeir siglðo með lande framm, ok
kallaðe hann veret hafa ágætan mann. En es hann lá við Vatnars-haug,
dreymðe hann at Vatnarr konungr kom at hónom ok mælte við hann:
'Þú hefer sagt saogo10 mína; vil-ek þat launa þer: leita þer feár í
hauge mínom, ok montú finna.' Hann leitaðe, ok fann þar miket fé.

4. Svá es sagt, at Haraldr konungr Harð-ráðe lá við Glaum-stein í
Hallande með her sínn. Þeir saó þar haug mikinn á siávar-hellonne, ok
annan lítlo ofarr. Hann spurðe hverer þar være15 leidder; en þat kunne
einge at segja. En um nóttena efter es hann hafðe þessa spurt, dreymðe
Sigurð enn Hvíta, at maðr kom at hónom í her-klæðom, ok kvað þetta:


    Sniallr á haug á hello, ...


Ena saomo nótt dreymðe Biaorn Buck, at annarr maðr kom at20 hónom
með enom sama búninge, ok kvað víso:


    Mín stóð búð ...


En es Haraldr konungr kom til Noregs, þá sagðe hónom Káre enn Svarte,
frænde Þióðolfs or Hvine, at þeir vóro syner Vatnars konungs, þeir
Sniallr ok Hialdr, ok vóro ener mesto her-menn.

5. Sniallr vas faðer Einars, f. Olves Barna-karls: hans son vas
Steinmóðr, ok Steinolfr, ok Grímr; ok Einarr, f. þeirra Hrolleifs,5
f. Svertings, f. Gríms at Mosfelle; ok Oleifs Breiðs, f. þeirra Þórmóðs
Skafta, ok Ofeigs Grettiss. Svá segja sumer menn, at Guðbrandr Kúla
være son Óleifs [1108] Breiðs; en Hialdr vas faðer Gríms, f. Biarnar
Buno. Biorn Buna átte Vélaugo, systor Vémundar ens Gamla: þeirra
syner vóro þeir Ketill Flatnefr, ok Hrappr, ok10 Helge, f. Helga,
f. Heyangrs-Biarnar, es ríkr herser [1109] ok ágætr vas í Sogne.

6. Yxna-Þórer hét maðr ágætr á Ogðom ok auðegr. Hann átte þær þriár
eyjar, es átta tiger yxna vóro í hverre. En es Haralldr konungr
Hárfagre bað hann strand-hoeggs, þá gaf hann15 hónom eina eyna,
ok alla yxnena með--af því vas hann kallaðr Yxna-Þórer. Ok (er) frá
hónom komet mart stór-menne á Íslande ok (í) Norege. Son Þóres vas
Ósvaldr, faðer Olves ens Hvíta, f. Þórsteins ens Hvíta, f. Þórgils,
f. Brodd-Helga, f. Víga-Biarna.


6. 1. Þesse ero naofn byscopa þeirra útlendra es veret hafa20 á
Íslande.--Friðrekr, Biarnarðr, Óláfr Groenlendinga byscop, Kolr,
Rodolfr, Ioan, Biarnarðr, Heinrekr, Arnaldr Groenlendinga byscop,
Ioan Groenlendinga byscop, ok Helge Groenlendinga byscop.

Vereð hafa enn fleire es byscopar létosk vesa, Guðiscolkr,25 Ornolfr;
ok iij af Armenia, Petrus, Stephanus, ok Abraham.

2. Freðrekr byscop kom í heiðne til Íslannz með Þórvalde Víð­faorla,
ok vas at Gilj-aó ok Loekja-móti. Biarnarðr enn Bókúse vas á Íslande
fimm vetr. Kolr faó aór. Rodolfr xix aór. Ioan enn Saxneski iiij
aór. Heinrekr ij aór. Biarnarðr xix aór; hann bió at Giljaó í Vatz-dal.







1. 1. In the year in which bishop Gizor died [1118] there came a great
famine in Iceland. There came a snowstorm in the dumb-bell-days [Holy
Week], so that men could not keep the hours [attend the offices] in the
churches in some hundreds in the north of the land. And long-fast-day
[Good Friday, 12 Apr.] there was a cog taken up under Ey-fell and
whirled aloft and cast down again bottom upward; she was a ship of
seven-and-twenty benches. The first day of Pask [Easter, 14 Apr.] few
men could seek the hours [go to the offices] to take the sacrament,
but some died of cold out of doors.

A second storm happened after his death on the day when men rode
to Moot, and killed the people's live stock in the North Quarter
[June 19 or 20]. The church at the Tynwall or Moot-field for which
king Harold Sigurd's son had had the wood hewn was then broken down.

That summer thirty-five ships came out here, and many were wrecked
upon the shore, and some foundered at sea with all hands, and eight
only got away again, with them that were here before [counting those
that wintered the year before], and they did not get over the sea
till after Michaelmas. By reason of this multitude of men there came
about a great famine here.

2. One winter after the death of bishop Gizor [1119] Thor-stan
Hall-ward's son, a gentleman, was slain.

3. And the winter after the Moot was crowded [1120]. Those seasons
there had been such a mortality that priest Sæmund the historian said
thus at the Moot, that there must have died no fewer men of sickness
than there were come thither to the Moot.

That summer there was a great throng at the Doom-court, when Thor-gils
Orde's son wounded Haf-lide Mar's son. It was so that no case could
be lawfully deemed or judged. Thor-gils was outlawed for the assault,
and sat in outlawry through the winter.

4. There was so little bearing of weapons at that time that there
was only one steel-cap at the All-moot, and yet almost every franklin
that was then in Iceland rode to the Moot.

5. And now it happened when three winters were passed from the death
of bishop Gizor that bishop John of Holar died [ix] kalend Maji
[23 April, 1121].

6. That summer Haf-lide Mar's son rode to the Moot with twelve hundred
[1440] men, and Thor-gils Orde's son with seven hundred [840] men. They
were set at peace at the Moot on the understanding that Thor-gils gave
Haf-lide self-doom [his own terms], and his award was sixty hundreds
of six ells-ounces of merchant standard, and paid in gold or burnt
silver, or seemly things of worth, and Haf-lide himself should value
them, or they whom he appointed thereto.

That summer was chosen bishop Cetil Thor-stan's son in bishop John's
stead, and he went out [abroad] that summer.

7. Haf-lide Mar's son had to wife first Thor-rid, daughter of Thord,
Sturla's son. The name of their son was Thord, who had to wife
Sol-ware, daughter of As-grim, Thor-hall's son. Their son's name
was Iwar. Afterwards Haf-lide married Rand-weig, daughter of Tait of
Hawk-dale. Their daughter's name was Sig-rid, whom Thord o' Water-dale
had to wife. Snorre and Paul were their sons. Another daughter of
Haf-lide and Rand-weig was called Wal-gerd, whom Ingimund the priest,
the son of Illuge and of Arna, daughter of Thor-kell, Gelle's son,
had to wife. Illuge was their son, who was drowned as he was bringing
from [? England] lime for the stone church which he meant to build
at Broad-bowster in West-hope.

2. 1. Earl Rogn-wald was slain five nights after the first Mary-mass
[Aug. 20, 1158].

2. But king An-laf, Tryggva's son, fought on the Long Serpent the
next day after the latter Mary-mass [i. e. Sept. 9, 1000].

3. 1. There was a great winter of dearth in Iceland in heathen days in
the time when Harold Gray-fell fell [976], and earl Hacon took power
in Norway. That has been the greatest [famine] in Iceland. Then men
ate ravens and foxes, and many bad uneatable things were eaten; and
some had the aged and helpless slain and cast over cliffs. Then many
men starved to death, and some lay out stealing [took to robbing], and
were therefore outlawed and slain. Then the men of the shaw [outlaws]
slew one another, for it was then made law, by the counsel of Ey-wolf
Walgerd's son, that he should free himself who slew three outlaws.

2. Eighty winters [1056] later there was another dearth. It began the
winter that Is-laf took bishop's hallowing at the hands of Albertus,
bishop of Bremen. That was in the days of king Harold, Sigurd's son.

And the first winter [1056-7] that bishop Is-laf was in Iceland there
was the greatest mortality in Iceland through hunger. Everything was
eaten then that the tooth could bite on. And in the summer the bishop
made a vow at the Moot, that men should fast the Twelfth-day of Yule
for three years; for so it was done in Her-forth [Her-ford] when the
bishop had been to school in Sax-land. There was at the time so much
snow everywhere that most men walked to the All-moot [middle of June];
but when the vow was made, immediately the weather bettered, and it
became the finest summer; and the winter after [1057-8] was so good
that there came no frost in the earth, and men went barefoot to the
hours [to church] at Yule-tide, and put up houses and made fences in
Thorre [January-February]. The next summer [1158] after it was made
law that men should always fast the Twelfth-day of Yule if it did
not fall on a Lord's-day. Bishop Gizor was the son of bishop Is-laf.

4. 1. Bearne Scegge's son sought wood for a fire-house [hall] in
Norway, and made a fire-house in Cross-wick, half forty [35] fathoms
long, and fourteen ells high, and fourteen ells broad, wherefore
he was called Bearne Long-house. He was drowned with seven men in
Shelving-bay as he was going to the Moot.

2. Brorde Thore's son, brother's son of Bearne Long-house, carried the
great hall out of Cross-wick to Temple and had it set up there. It
was then half thirty [25] fathoms long, and thirteen ells broad,
and thirteen ells high. Brorde was the greatest man to keep up an
estate, and he became wealthless [poor]. Then he went west to Holar
in Healte-dale to bishop Cetil Thor-stan's son and died there at
his house.

5. 1. The genealogies of Olaf the Saint, Hauk, Bishop Gizor.

2. See Ld. V. 11. 1. The genealogy of Harold Fairhair. But when he
was ten winters old his father Half-dan was drowned in Ringa-ric in
the mere that is called Rond as he was driving over the ice, and the
ice broke when he came to the cattle-rills [i. e. holes cut in the ice
for the cattle to drink from] over against Swers-stead in Rykins-wick,
and he was drowned there and all his men. Then Harold took the name
of king. But when he was twenty he first laid under him, or his rule,
Sogn-folk, but earl Atle had never paid scot. And afterwards he laid
under him, or got under his rule, all Norway, as it is said in the
history of him.

3. Wic-here was the name of a king, the son of Harold, king of the
Agds. His son was king Watn-here, whose barrow is south of Hacon-slate
[an island south of Bergen]. There was a chapman in Norway that was
telling the history of Watn-here as they sailed along the land, and he
said that he had been a noble man. But when they lay off Watn-here's
howe he dreamed that king Watn-here came to him and spoke to him:
'Thou hast told my history; I will reward thee therefore; seek thou
treasure in my howe and thou shalt find.' He sought and found there
much treasure.

4. It is said that king Harold Hard-rede lay off Gleam-stone in Halland
[Swedish coast] with his host. They saw there a great howe on the
sea-cliff, and another a little above. He asked who were laid there,
and no one could tell him. But the night after he had asked, Sigurd the
White dreamed that a man came to him in war-clothes and recited this:--


    'Snell has a barrow on the cliff. Heald on the hill.
    Victory is on your spears. Wake to a day of blood.'


        [See Corpus Poet. Bor., ii. 328.]


And the same night Beorn Buck dreamed that another man came to him
in the same gear, and recited the verse:--


    'My booth is the farthest:
    We are glad ye give slain to Woden.'


        [See Corpus Poet. Bor., 1. c]


But when king Harold came to Norway, then Care the Black, the kinsman
of Thord-wolf of Hwin, said that they were the sons of king Watn-here,
Snell and Heald, and they were the greatest of warriors.

5. Snell was the father of Ein-here, the father of Olwe
Bairn-carle. His sons were Stan-mod and Stan-wolf and Grim; and
Ein-here, father of Hrod-laf (father of Swerting, father of Grim o'
Moss-fell), and of Oleif Broad, the father of Thor-mod Shaft and
Un-fey Grette. Some men say that Gud-brand Cula was the son of Olaf
Broad, but Heald was the father of Grim, the father of Beorn Bune. See
Ld. V. 13. 1.

6. Oxen-Thore was the name of a noble and a wealthy man in Agd. He
had three islands there, and there were eighty oxen on each; but when
king Harold Fairhair asked him for a strand-hew [i. e. provision of
meat for his ships], he gave him an island and all the oxen upon it,
wherefore he was called Oxen-Thore. And from him are come many a great
man in Iceland and in Norway. The son of Thore was Os-wald, the father
of Olaf the White, the father of Thor-stan the White, the father of
Thor-gils, the father of Brord-Helge, the father of Slaughter-Bearne.

6. 1. [Names of the foreign bishops that have been in Iceland. See
Libellus and Hungrvaca.]










The Tale of Gar-mund Hell-skin. [Cp. Ld. II. ch. 17.]

The Text, see Sturl. (1878) I. chs. 1-6.


Gar-mund Hell-skin was the son of king Heor, the son of Half
(after whom Half's renks or champions are called), the son of king
Heor-laf. The second son of king Heor was Heah-mund, who was also
called Hell-skin. They were twins. And this is the old tale of why
they were called Hell-skin. It happened at the time when king Heor
was to go to the tryst of kings that the queen was great with child,
and she was brought to bed while the king was out of the country,
and she bore two boys. They were both wonderful big, and both of
marvellous fair countenance, but yet there was the greatest blemish
to be seen in them that no one thought darker skins had been seen
than these boys had. The queen set little love on the boys, and they
looked unlovely to her. Shag-hood was the name of the thrall that
had the governance of the other thralls. This thrall was married,
and his wife gave birth to her son at the very same time that the
queen was brought to bed; and this boy that the thrall's wife had
was so wonderfully fair that the queen could see no blemish in him,
and this boy seemed to her more lovely than her own boys. So the queen
was minded to make an exchange with the bondmaid of the boys. But it
was with the bondmaid as with the queen: she thought her son showed
the better breeding; nevertheless she did not dare to refuse to make
an exchange of the boys with the queen. And so the queen took the
bondmaid's son, and had a name given him and called the boy Laf, and
the queen called the boy her son. But the bondmaid took the queen's,
and they were bred up in the straw on the floor like other bondchildren
until they were three winters old. But Laf played with his hands,
or lived at his ease, in plenty, and was honoured as kings' sons are
wont to be. But as the boys grew up and got older together, Laf began
to dwindle, but Heah-mund and Gar-mund got on fast the older they got,
and each began to take more after his own kin.

It is told that once on a time Brage the poet was bidden to a feast
at king Heor's, and stayed with the king some little while, and one
day, it is said, the king went a hunting with his men, and there were
few folk left at home in the hall. Brage the poet stayed at home,
and he was sitting in the high bench with a rod of reed in his hand,
playing with it, and muttering to himself, his head wrapped in his
cloak. The queen lay on the daïs in the inner end of the hall, and she
was covered with clothes so that no one would know that she was there,
save those that had known it before. Laf was sitting in the high seat
playing with a golden ring, but the brethren Heah-mund and Gar-mund
were sitting on the floor looking at Laf playing with the ring. They
could see no one in the hall. Then Gar-mund said to his brother,
'Shall we two go to Laf and take away the golden ring from him,
and play with it ourselves for awhile?' 'I am ready to do it,' says
Heah-mund. Then the boys ran up the hall to the high seat, and took
the golden ring from Laf, but he fell a whimpering after it. Then
they spake. 'Listen,' said they, 'how the king's son is behaving;
he is crying after a golden ring, and it is a true saying, that what
thou hast is ill bestowed.' And with that the boys caught hold of Laf
and pulled him out of the high seat and laughed at him. Then Brage
the poet stood up and walked up to where the queen lay on the daïs
and touched her with the reeden rod, and spake this verse. [See Book
I. p. 88.] The queen stood up and took the twin boys and went out and
made a second exchange with the bondmaid. And now the queen saw how
it was that they were growing up full of promise, as it was likely
they would and according to their birth.

But in the evening when the king came home and had sat him down in his
high seat, the queen walked up to the king leading the two boys with
her, and told the king all that had happened and how she had made an
exchange with the bondwoman, and begged forgiveness of the king. The
king looked at the boys, and said, 'Surely I take these boys to be
of my kin, but yet I have never before seen such a pair of HELL-SKINS
as these boys!' Wherefore they were called Hell-skins ever after.

And as soon as they were full grown they went abroad a-warring, and
soon got both riches and renown thereby, and long led great fleets,
as it is told in some old tales and somewhat touched on in the latter
part of the Tale of Rook the Black--to wit, that these brethren were
called then the greatest warriors of sea-kings at that time.

And it happened one summer as they were on a Western cruise that they
got much more booty than other summers, as the story goes. And before
they came home they shared their booty of that summer, and there fell
to each one's lot twenty pounds of silver and two pounds of gold. And
that same summer they broke up their company, and each of them sent
his men away with good payment. The brethren sailed together each
in his own ship to the kingdom of the king of Norway. King Harold
Fairhair was then ruling over Norway, and the brethren thought to
find a frith-land or asylum there, and they broke up their fleet and
partnership. But when the king heard of it he did not like their
staying there, and thought it not unlikely that they might gather
strength and come against him. And some men will have it that Gar-mund
went to Iceland by reason of the tyranny of king Harold. But I have
heard that in those days when the brethren came off their Western
cruise, it was the talk of most that there could be no more famous
voyage than that to Iceland, and that is why Gar-mund was minded to
sail out thither; that very summer he and his brother came to Norway,
though it was then late in the summer. But Heah-mund would not do so,
and Heah-mund went to meet with Helge the Lean, and afterwards they
also went out together to Iceland.

But Gar-mund went out at once and made Broad-frith in his ship,
and was at Booth-dale the first winter he was in Iceland. But in the
spring he took land in settlement [the Tale goes on as in Ld.].

Gar-mund dwelt at Gar-mund-stead till he was stricken in age. But
there was one combe in the lands of Gar-mund that he used to say he
would choose away out of his lands if he could have his will, and
chiefly for this reason, 'that there is a place in the combe whence
whenever I look at it comes a light that blinds my eyes, which I do
not like; and this light is always over the rowan-grove that grows
there apart under the brink of the hill.' And it came to this pass,
that if at any time some of his cattle had been in the combe he would
have the day's milk thrown away. And once on a time, as it is said,
his cattle had lain there all night. And when the shepherd rose up
and saw the cattle in the combe he was mightily afraid, and ran as
fast as he could and hunted the cattle out of the combe, and broke a
stick out of the rowan-coppice and beat the cattle with it, and drove
the cattle home to Gar-mund-stead. But Gar-mund had got up out of bed
that morning and gone out of doors, and he saw the shepherd hunting
the cattle down out of the combe, and he was not at all pleased that
the cattle had been there, and he turned to meet the shepherd, and
soon espied that he had a wand of rowan in his hand beating the cattle
with it. And now he grew so furious or frantic at both these things
together, that he ran upon the shepherd and beat him mightily, bidding
him never do such a thing again as to beat his cattle with the wood
that grew in this combe, and least of all of that rowan-coppice; but
Gar-mund could easily tell the wood, because there only in his estate
did rowan-wood grow, on the very spot where the church of Scard now
stands, according as we have heard true historians tell. Gar-mund had
the wand taken and burnt in the fire, and his cattle he had driven to
the pasture, and that day's milk thrown away.--Sturlunga I. chs. 1-6.






A third version, from the end of Half's Saga, extant in a single copy.


Hiorr konungr Halfs son átte Hagnýjo, dóttor Haka konungs Hámundar
sonar. Hiorr konungr fór í kononga-stefno; en meðan foedde Hagný tvá
sono, ok hét annarr Hámundr, en annarr Geirmundr. Þá foedde ambótt
ok son, ok hét Leifr; hann vas enn fríðaste: dróttning keypte um sono
við ambótt, ok foerðe5 þann konunge.

Konungr fór enn annat sinn í leiðangr; þá vóro sveinarner þrí
vetrer. Leifr gugnaðe sem á aldr hans leið, en Hámundr ok Geirmundr
vóro geyse-mikler ok orð-víser. Brage skáld kom þar at heimboðe.10

Þat vas einn dag at karlar aller fóro á skóg, en konor á hnet-skóg,
ok vas ecke heima-manna í haollenne [1110], nema Brage sat í aondoge,
en dróttning leyndesk þar ok vas hulið klæðom. Leifr sat í há-sæte
ok lék ser at golle; en Hámundr ok Geirmundr vóro í halmenom niðr-á
golfeno: þá fóro þeir til Leifs ok skúfoðo hónom or sæteno ok tóko
þeir af hónom gollet allt: hann grét þá. Þá stóð Brage upp ok geck
þar til es dróttning lá, ok drap staf ofan í klæðen, ok kvað:


    Tveir 'ro, ok trueg vel báðom....5
    Foedder eige þú þann maog, kona.


Síðan skipte Hagný aptr sveinonom við ambótt.

En es Hiorr konungr kom heim, þá bar hon sveinana til hans ok sagðe
at þeir vóro hans syner. Konongr svarar: 'Berr í braut,' sagðe hann,
'eige sá-ek slík heljar-skinn.'--Þeir vóro báðer svá10 kallaðer
síðan. Þeir vóro mikler afreks-menn at afle, ok mikel ætt es frá
þeim komen á Íslande: Þórer á Espe-hóle vas son Hámundar--þaðan ero
komner Espelingar. Geirmundr Heljar-skinn nam Meðalfellz-straond í
Breiða-firðe: Ýre hét dótter hans; ok es þaðan mikel ætt komen.15







King Heor, the son of Half, had to wife Hag-ny, the daughter of
king Hake, Ha-mund's son. King Heor went to the tryst of kings, and
meanwhile Hag-ny bore two sons, and they were dark and wonderfully
ugly, and the one was called Heah-mund and the other Gar-mund. There
was a bondwoman also that bore a son, and he was called Laf. He was
very fair to see. The queen exchanged sons with the bondwoman, and
brought him to the king. The king went away a second time on a barge
when the boys were three winters old. Laf dwindled as he grew up, but
Heah-mund and Gar-mund were stout and strong, and quick to talk. Brage
the poet came there to a feast. It happened one day that the men were
all gone to the wood to hunt and the women nutting, and there was no
one left at home in the hall, save Brage, who sat on the high bench,
and the queen who was hidden there covered with clothes. Laf was
sitting in the high seat playing with a golden ring, and Heah-mund and
Gar-mund were down in the straw on the floor. They went up to Laf and
shoved him out of the high seat and took [all] his golden ring from
him; then he fell a-weeping. Then Brage stood up, and walked up to
where the queen lay, and struck her clothes with his staff, and said
these verses. [See Ld. II. ch. 17.] Then Hag-ny exchanged back the
boys with the bondwoman. But when king Heor came home, she brought
the boys to him and said that they were his sons. The king answers,
'Take them away!' said he, 'I never saw such HELL-SKINS.' They were
both called so ever after. They were doughty men of might, and there is
a great kin come of them in Iceland. Thore of Asp-hillock was the son
of Heah-mund. Thence are come the Asp-hillock-men. Gar-mund Hell-skin
took Mid-fell's-strand in Broad-frith as his settlement. Yre was the
name of his daughter, and thence is a great kindred come.


[Here endeth Book I.]












PART II

BOOK II.

THE OLD CONSTITUTION.

This book is made up of records, by Are or his contemporaries, of the
history of the old law, custom, and constitutions down to his day,
and as far back as the memory of man then ran.


Section 1. The little Islendinga-book, Libellus Islandorum, as Are
calls it himself, a brief abridgment of Icelandic history written to
the order of the two Bishops, Thorlac and Ketil. It was, we think,
first written in Latin, and afterwards literally translated into the
vernacular tongue by some clerk; the Latin original is lost, yet the
translation, being close, gives the exact work as nearly as may be.

Section 2. Fragments relating to primitive law and old customs,
which are probably taken in great part from some scroll of Are, in
part from other sources, glosses and the like, written down in his day.

Section 3. Bits of early law and customs of the Icelandic Commonwealth,
picked out of the later codices known as Grágás, as illustrative of
the oldest constitutional law.

Section 4. The chapter in Nial's Saga which tells of the formation
of the Fifth Doom or Court.






CHAPTER 1

§ 1. LIBELLUS ISLANDORUM


It is most fit that this book, like the last, should begin with Are's
work, for it is desirable in every way to emphasize our debt to
him for the mass of political and legal as well as the historical
and genealogical information we have of the heathen days. His
attitude towards the old faith is indeed singular, religious but not
ecclesiastical--a sober, curt, matter-of-fact relation of heathen
forms and ceremonies, witchcraft and crime, singular to behold in
a mediæval writer. The colourless words 'sid' and 'forn,' which he
applies to heathen customs and ways, proclaim the impartiality of
his language. His records of heathen and Christian times are much
like the log-books of two voyages--one to the Old World, one to
the New. Such men have unluckily been rare. His position of course
helped him: a priest himself, of high family, he could never for
a moment be suspected of any leaning towards the old ways; while
the duties required of a man in his station no doubt gave him that
practical experience and sound knowledge of actual life so valuable
to an historian.

Our means of building up the text of this work consists of one vellum
of the middle of the 12th century, thought, though wrongly, to be
Are's autograph. It was extant in the year 1651, as appears from John
Erlendsson's colophon on one of his two copies. Its later history
is unknown: for it is unknown to all writers of early 17th century
(Biorn, Arngrim). Nor do we know how, or by what accident it was
shortly after lost. It must have been a beautiful and interesting
MS., for John's best copy is evidently intended to reproduce the
chief features of the original, an unique effort probably among
the copyists of his day. His two copies are:--AM. 113 b, fol.,
the fair one, undated, which has been used for our text [1111],
marked A and Cd. here, the editor having made a letter-for-letter
transcript in 1884. The other above mentioned is numbered AM. 113 a,
fol. [1112] Its colophon runs: 'These Schedæ [slips] of priest Are
the historian and records are written in a book-fell or vellum, after
his own handwriting or manuscript (as men suppose) in Willinga-holt,
by priest John Ellendsson, anno dei 1651, Monday next after Dominicam
Jubilate. John Ellendsson per manum propriam [1113].'

Arne Magnusson, who owned A, has treated it rather disrespectfully,
writing in various readings from the other sister copy in the margin
and between the lines, and altering letters, spelling, etc., but the
difference between his ink and priest John's serves to show where
his pen has been.

There are many other copies, viz. AM. 113 C-K fol., and AM. 365-8,
4to.--the last is a Latin translation of Arne's. They are all of the
second half of the 17th century, all copies of John Erlendsson's A
and B. They can be thus classified:--

In the prologue a letter in the vellum must have been somehow injured,
so as to make 'mis sagt' (mis-said spelt probably with a single s)
to look as 'nu sagt' (now said). The best copies have the latter,
the next best copies the former reading (by an easy emendation). They
are thus divided:--

Nu sagt: AM. 113 B, 113 A, fol.; 365, 366, 368, 4to. (lat. iam
tradatur).

Mis sagt:--113 K, 113 F, 113 E, 113 C, 113 G, 113 H, 113 I, Edit. 1688,
Edit. Oxon.

So much for the Libellus and its copies.

But there are several long quotations preserved from another lost
MS. or MSS., especially of the last two chapters (9-10) and of the
7th, containing Are's account of the conversion and the lives of the
first two bishops. Of chs. 1-6 and 8 but little is preserved. This
text is here marked A*.

From the last two chapters:--

1. Chs. 13-14 of Lawman Sturla's Islendinga Saga (Sturl. i. pp. 204-6)
contain large parts of the last two chapters of Libellus, yet in a
different order, thus:--Libell. 9. 1, 8; 10. 1, 3, 4, 6, 8, 10-12;
9. 2, 9. Here marked A* (S).

2. The compiler of Christni Saga (Hawk or his authority) must
have had in hand a copy of Libellus, or the latter part thereof,
along with a continuation or appendix (our Mantissa); this, too,
in somewhat different order, thus:--Libell. 9. 8, 1, 8; 10. 1, 3-9,
11. Here marked A* (K).

3. The author of Hungrvaca gives Libell. 10. 3, 5, 6. Marked A* (H).

4. Odd the Monk (in AM. 310) inserts a whole chapter from
Islendinga-book, which he cites by name; all from the 7th chapter
of Libellus, interlarded by pieces of the Ceartan tradition, of
the Laxdæla Saga, and by one bit of Hialte's Saga (the Crosses),
viz.:--Libell. 7. 1-8. Here marked A* (OM).

5. Bishop John's Saga, perhaps partly through Hungrvaca:--Libell. 9. 3,
4, 12.

6. Landnama-book, Cd. S, has inserted the census:--Libell. 10. 6.

So much for chs. 7, 9, 10.

As for the other chapters our sources are less abundant; what we have
observed is--

7. The scribe of the big vellum called Watz-hyrna, in copying
Hoensa-Þoris Saga, has inserted a large piece, in a terribly corrupt
and paraphrased state, of Libell. ch. 5. Here marked A* (Wh.). A copy
of Libellus--mutilated, blotted, and blurred (to judge from the gross
errors)--seems to have been still extant, in the scribe's hands.

8. A copy of Rimbegla (Roy. Libr., 1812, 12th century vell.) has
preserved a whole piece of chapter 4; it is as if it had been taken
from the archetype of our A (Libellus, not Liber), for it has the
same error in this place. We have marked this A* (1812).

These extracts and texts are most important as a means of restoring
Are's whole text. As was the use of the ancients in quoting or citing,
they are often paraphrased, carelessly copied, and so on, yet, making
allowance for all that, the impression one gathers is this, that the
text of A*, though essentially or often even word for word the same
as that of A, was better executed. Something no doubt is due to the
fact that Libellus has come down in one MS. only, wherein there are
numerous evident scribe's errors and slips. John's copy has, we take
it, added none, or next to none, to that stock of errors.

We have picked out of this A* text whatever has manifest marks
of being Are's own work, omitted or misread in our A. All this is
printed in brackets, so that the reader may take stock of it at a
single glance. In two or three instances only, ch. 5. 1-3 (p. 293,
notes 5, 8, 19), we have not entered it into the text, but left it
in the foot-note.

The chapter-divisions we have, for convenience, further broken into
paragraphs.

Earlier editions are: the Editio princeps, Scalholt black-letter,
issued with Landnama-book, 1688; the Oxford edition, 1716; Copenhagen
edition, 1830. John Sigurdsson's edition of 1843, with normal text
and with fairly exact copy of A also. That of Th. Möbius, Kiel, 1869,
is a reprint of the preceding.

It was the life-long desire and study of Arne Magnusson to make a
full and grand edition of this work, and to this end he made large
collectanea during many years of his life. His canons of literary
work were however so high, that he never accomplished his task. As
John Olafsson says: 'In his book-writing he was very scrupulous not
to deal with any vain or useless matter, and still more with what was
not true. He used to say the world was over-full already of books
nothing worth, even though he added none thereto. Yea, he was so
hard to satisfy in this matter, that I have heard him say that a man
might be well nigh all his life about composing one little book, and
he would say that he had never meant to be a writer himself.... Yet
he wrote a version and commentary on Are the historian's Islendinga
Saga (sic), which were for the most part in loose leaves, and I noted
in the lamented Arne that he was sorry that he had not had the book
put into print before he died.' By Islendinga Saga here John means
Are's Libellus.

The editor (in 1884) copied much of Arne's curious remarks and
quaint discussions from these very loose leaves, still preserved
in the Additamenta of his Library, small slips and little bits of
paper thrust into a bundle, even two specimens of title-pages he
drew up. The specimens which we hope to print in some appendage,
if not appendix, will show the acuteness and historic instinct,
but also that over-scrupulosity which prevented Arne from ever being
contented with his own judgment.

While at Copenhagen, in the spring of 1887, a new view as to the
original shape of Are's Libellus was opened to the editor. He was
talking on Are and his records of early law with Dr. Finsen, when the
latter said, 'It is curious that Are, who took so much interest in
such matters, used such vague and untechnical terms respecting them
in his Libellus. He cannot have been a lawyer, nor a gode even, nor
can he have held a seat in the Court of Laws, for it is incredible
that with legal experience or training he should not use the regular
legal phraseology.' He went on to mention a few instances (always
from Libellus), e.g. Hann was 'hofðinge at sokenne' (ch. 5. 1). 'No
man of law,' he said, 'could have expressed himself so.' So again,
'Then was written Vigslóde, "oc mart annat í laogom;" how vague and
indistinct!' and he added a few more examples of the kind.

Here was an observation that demanded further notice. Dr. Finsen's
trained eye had detected for the first time a curious blot in the
Libellus. But how may the reason for this blot be discovered? Are,
even should we allow that he were neither lawyer nor gode, must surely
have heard and known the regular legal terminology of his days. One
need not be an M. A. of Oxford to know that Oriel is ruled by a
Provost, while the Head of Balliol is a Master: any unmatriculated
tradesman will know so much, and laugh at any mistaken use of these
terms. In an early state of society (as among school-boys with us)
the misuse of technical language is a ridiculous and indecent thing,
ever carefully avoided. We have, too, no such mistakes or slips
in any other of Are's works: Landnama-book is full of accurate and
regular phraseology on law matters. There must be some other key to
the puzzle than the supposition that Are was ignorant.

As Dr. Finsen was speaking, the idea flashed across the editor's mind
that Are was thinking of Latin phrases, trying to choose words as near
them as possible [1114]; but on getting back to England, thinking the
matter over, he perceived that a more thorough hypothesis than this
was needed,--that the only way to account for the whole phenomena
was to believe that Libellus was composed originally in Latin; that
then it was given to the bishops; that from this Latin a vernacular
version was afterwards made, not by Are, but keeping close to his
Latin, and that this vernacular version came down in one old MS.,
whence our Libellus MSS. and citations are derived.

Such an hypothesis seems at first startling and complicated, but the
evidence, whether external or internal, confirms it so absolutely and
so consistently as to give one confidence in putting it forth. Let
us look at the evidence bit by bit.

The book itself--to one who reads it without prepossession, and
purged of that film of accepted traditionalism which blinds a man and
prevents him from seeing the obvious fact--is of strangely unfamiliar
type and diction. Its whole framework and base of composition is not
only unlike those with which the Icelandic classics have rendered us
familiar, but widely different to those of acknowledged and evident
works by Are himself--Landnama-book, and those parts of Eyrbyggia
and of the Kings' Lives that bear his mark. The framework of the
book is Latin, preface, chapter-divisions, and so on. The build and
syntax of the sentences is Latin and unidiomatic; see, for instance,
ch. 1. 1, the long-drawn clause. There is a lack of pithy, homely,
natural phrase, a weakness of construction, a kind of helplessness in
expression, an employment of strange neologisms (óliúgfróð, 1. 1),
a vagueness of statement, all characteristics alien to the brief,
clear, precise, and at the same time sympathetic phraseology of the
great historian. Marks of Latin origin are even yet apparent--the
title, the heading of the chapter-list, Incipit Libellus Islandorum;
In hoc codice continentur capitula; words like rex, obiit, secundus
[1115], and the like (never met with in the regular Icelandic classic
composition); forms like 'Norueg,' which, as noticed below, reproduce
the ecclesiastical 'Norwegia,' and curious unidiomatic phrases and
words which fall naturally and easily back into the Latin they suggest.

Books are not even now-a-days wholly purposeless, and in old days they
have their purpose clearly expressed in their whole construction. In
Iceland in Are's days a writer had one of two objects--either
technical instruction, for which the Law Scrolls were written down,
or the pleasure and delight of the reader, for which the great bulk
of the classics of Iceland was composed--the Sagas or Histories, and
especially Are's own records of old days, stories of the Settlers,
and the like. Now Libellus is not composed for entertainment, nor is it
a technical treatise; it is rather a sketch of the scope of a report,
designed to give to persons necessarily ignorant of the subject-matter
a broad general view of the Icelandic state and its brief history. It
is a copy, as the author tells us himself, of the third part of
his Liber, made for the bishops at their request, shown to Sæ-mund
(the leading ecclesiastic of the day next to the two bishops, taught
abroad, and more familiar probably with this kind of writing than
Are himself could be), and returned, apparently with suggestions for
improvement, to the writer. Now why did the bishops want this book,
and give such trouble to its correction? It was not for their own use;
they would have got more profitable information and fuller from Are's
Landnama-book and traditional records. Is it not likely that they
wished to send it abroad, that they had a mind to give the archbishop,
or some other influential friend abroad, an account of their island,
its history and state? To fulfil this purpose it must be in Latin.

Can we get any light from contemporary events which may enable us
to fix the occasion for which Libellus was composed? It would seem
so. The chief event of real import at the time was the passing of the
Christian Law Section in c. 1125 (an event already preceded by the
passing of the Tithe Law in 1096 by the influence of bishop Gizor,
priest Sæ-mund, and law-speaker Mark).

The colophon of the Christian Law Section runs thus: 'So did
they--bishop Thor-lac and bishop Ketil, by the counsel of archbishop
Ozor and of priest Sæ-mund and many other clerks--establish the
Christian Law that hath now been set forth and declared [1116].'

The similarity of this passage with that of Are's preface to Libellus
with regard both to time and persons is obvious and striking. The
bishops and Sæ-mund occur in both, but with Are the historian added
in one case, and archbishop Ozor in the other. Have we not here a
key to the whole transaction? Was not the treatise ordered by the
bishops and revised by them and Sæ-mund, to be sent with a copy of the
Christian Law to Ozor, who was the first archbishop of Lund and the
first Northern primate? A careful account of a part of his province
would necessarily be very welcome to him, and would answer the same
purpose as the Report of a Royal Commission would now-a-days.

Can we fix the date more nearly? Ozor was consecrated in 1104, Thor-lac
in 1118, and Ketil in 1122. Sae-mund died in June, 1133, aged 77, and
Thor-lac had predeceased him in February the same year. We are thus
brought to some date between 1123 and 1132, and we can have little
doubt but that such sweeping reforms and such vigorous action as the
passing of the Christian Law imports, were the work of the beginning
rather than the end of the bishop's reign, and when Sæ-mund was still
vigorous enough to take an active part in supporting them.

Hence somewhere about 1125 would be a likely date.

The necessity for the revision by the bishops and Sæ-mund is explained
by consideration of the purport of the work. The genealogies might
smack of heathendom, the Lives of the Kings were exotic matter,
and hence their omission; which the additions were (þar viðr auca,
es nú es gorr sagt) we cannot tell, the first draft being lost.

Are would be 58 years old in 1125, a man well known for his historical
work and learning, and hence the natural person to be asked to supply
the record the bishops wanted to send abroad with their copy of the
Christian Law.

From Are's Latin some scribe (one of the bishops' chaplains probably)
put the document into the vernacular before it was sent away, and
this copy was most likely kept in the registry of Scala-holt or
Holar. That this was not done under Are's eye is evident from the
lack of technicality in the phrases and style.

This scribe was a clerk no doubt, who knew Latin but not law, and he
had the difficult task of putting Are's technical phrases expressed in
Latin of the type Bæda uses, we may suppose, into such apt Icelandic
as he could guess at. In the process Are's concrete term vanishes, and
a mere abstract or general term more or less fitting takes its place.

The discrepancy between the Libellus and the rest of Are's work in
style, vocabulary, and arrangement is absolute, such as the difference
of purpose and the process of reversion or retranslation through which
the former has passed could alone satisfactorily, we believe, explain.

Our A confessedly represents Libellus, not Liber. But how about A*? A
comparison of the test words, or technical words, points to an identity
of both texts. Only A* has reached us in very paraphrastic condition,
but this must be put to the account of the scribes or writers who
quoted. Word for word citations, such as in modern works, were
unknown to the ancients. There is no necessity of any far-fetched
or complicated theory to account for the few words dropped out or
inserted in them; the important fact is that they contain no statement
the ground for which is not to be seen in the existing Libellus text,
a text which is evidently, as we have noticed, derived from a MS. that
must have stood in very close relationship to the original archetype.

As for the Liber, it was probably cancelled: the two parts of it--the
Genealogies and Kings' Lives--we have, at least in substance, and
probably in far fuller detail, in the Book of Settlements and the
Book of Kings. The third part, as corrected, is our present Libellus.

Latin books had a poor chance of survival in Iceland. They were not
copied, hence they perished. For example, Sæ-mund's Lives of Kings,
Odd's Life of Tryggvason, Gun-laug's Life of Bishop John of Holar are
all gone, only leaving traces in the vernacular. How much more has
been destroyed without a sign we cannot tell. Are's original Latin
text must be sought at that precious storehouse of the history of
Christendom--the Vatican itself, whither a copy may possibly still
lurk, spared from the destruction that has overtaken many early
documents.

The fact that no trace of Libellus or other Icelandic documents
relating to Ozor's time are to be found in Lund itself, speaks for
the terrible destruction of documents during the turbulent times
of Danish history that preceded the Reformation. Moreover in 1234
the palace (stadr) of Lund was destroyed by fire [Icel. Ann. and
Ann. Sturl. ii. 372], an ominous date for our Libellus.

The respective dates of Liber and Libellus we have touched on above. We
had once, in 1878, drawn a different conclusion, based on 10. 8. b;
but that clause is a manifest gloss, absent in A* (S, K), put in after
the book was finished; as it stands it cuts in two the paragraph
about Bergthor in an impossible way. It therefore proves nothing
as to the date of Libellus. We should date the Liber about 1123 or
1124, for it was dedicated to Bishop Ketil, who was not consecrated
till 1122. (See for dates of Law-speakers and Bishops of Iceland,
the Sturlunga, Oxford, ii. 469 and 470.) But upon the date of Liber
depends that of the Libellus (dedicated, too, as the pedigrees at the
end show, to the same bishops, and re-issued at their and Sæ-mund's
instance). There need, we hold, be no long interval between the two
issues--a couple of years would answer all purposes.

The book comprises a prologue, with a genealogy that supplies to
some extent the main dates; then table of contents, and body of ten
chapters, followed by an epilogue which stands in lieu of a dedication
of compliment to the two bishops; and it is completed by the pedigree
and name of the author, which serves the same purpose as the title-page
in a modern book.

The little genealogy, Prologue 2, is a gloss, we believe; it could
hardly have been written by the writer of the first phrases of the
first chapter.

John Erlendsson's autotype had the form 'Norwegh' throughout with the
'w.' This is a Latinism, for though it always survived in England,
being there a survival of Norse older than our Sagas, the 'w' form
died in the North in the 10th century. It remains in the Homily-book,
and the old fragment of Olaf Tryggvason's Life by Odd the Monk;
in all these instances it is an Eccles. Latin reminiscence.

'Schedæ' is the title given to Libellus in edit. 1688 and Oxon. 1712;
by Arne Magnusson, d. 1730, and Bp. Finn in 1772. John Erlendsson in
the colophon to his copy of 1651, we believe, coined this title. The
author himself called it Libellus Islandorum, in distinction from the
earlier issue, Liber Islandorum, or Islendinga-bóc. Hence it is not
strictly correct, as modern authors use, to call this shorter second
issue 'Islendinga-bóc.'








[PROLOGUS.]

1. Islendinga-bóc goerða-ec fyrst byscopom órom Þórláke oc Katle,
oc sýndac boeðe þeim oc Sæmunde preste. En með þvi at þeim lícaðe
svá at hava eða þar viðr auca, þá skrifaða-ec þessa of et sama far,
fyr útan Ættar-taolo [1117] oc Conunga-æve; oc iócc því es mer varð
síðan cunnara, oc nú es5 goerr sagt á þesse an á þeirre. En hvatke
es mis-sagt es í froeðom þessom þá es scyllt at hava þat helldr es
sannara reynesc.

[2. Halfdan Hvítbeinn Upplendinga conungr, son Óláfs Tré­telgjo
Svia-conungs, vas faðer Eysteins Fretz, faoðor Halfdanar ens Milda oc
ens Matar-ílla, faoðor Goðroeðar Veiðe-conungs,10 faoðor Halfdanar
ens Svarta, faoðor Harallz ens Hárfagra, es fyrstr varð þess cyns
einn conungr at aollom Norvege.]

In hoc codice continentur capitula.


    Frá Íslannz bygð, I.
    Frá Lannáms-maonnom, II, oc laga-setníng.
    Frá Alþingis-setning, III.15
    Frá Misseres-tale, IIII.
    Frá Fiórðunga-deild, V.
    Frá Groenlannz bygð, VI.
    Frá því es Cristne kom á Ísland, VII.
    Frá byscopom útlendom, VIII.20
    Frá Ísleife byscope, IX.
    Frá Gizore byscope, X.






Prologus.

1. The Book of the Men of Iceland I first made for our bishops Thor-lac
and Ketil, and showed both to them and to Sæ-mund the priest. And
with as much of it as they wished to have thus or to add thereto. I
have written also this one of the same without the Genealogies and
the Lives of the Kings. And I added to it as much as had afterwards
become better known to me, and it is now more clearly said in this
than in that other. And as to whatever be mis-said in this history,
it is right to hold rather that which shall be proved more true.

[2. Half-dan White-leg, king of the Up-land-men, son of An-laf
Tree-cutter, king of the Swedes, was father of Aistan Fret, father
of Half-dan the Bounteous and the Ill-feeder, father of God-fred
the Hunter-king, father of Half-dan the Swart, father of Harold the
Fair-hair, who first of this kin became sole king over all Norway.]

In this treatise are contained the headings:--Of the Settlement of
Iceland, I; of the Men of the Settlement, and the setting up of
the Laws or Constitution, II; of the setting up of the All-moot,
III; of the Calendar, IV; of the Parting of the Quarters, V; of the
Settlement of Greenland, VI; of how Christendom came to Iceland, VII;
of Foreign Bishops, VIII; of Bishop Is-laf, IX; of Bishop Gizor, X.






INCIPIT LIBELLUS ISLANDORUM.


1. 1. Ísland bygðesc fyrst or Norvege á daogom Harallz ens Hárfagra,
Halfdanar sonar ens Svarta: í þann tíð,--at ætlon oc taolo þeirra
Teitz fóstra míns, þess mannz es ec cunna spacastan, sonar Ísleifs
byscops; oc Þórkels faoðor-bróðor míns, Gellis sonar, es langt
munðe fram; oc Þóríðar Snorra dóttor5 Goða, es bæðe vas marg-spaoc
oc óliúg-fróð--es Ívarr, Ragnars son Loðbrócar, lét drepa Eadmund
enn Helga Engla-conung. En þat vas dccclxx [vetra] [1118] epter burð
Cristz, at því es ritið es í Saogo hans.

2. Ingolfr hét maðr Noroenn, es sannlega es sagt, at foere fyrst10
þaðan til Íslannz, þá es Haralldr enn Hárfagre vas xvj vetra gamall. En
í annat sinn faóm vetrom síðarr. Hann bygðe suðr í Reykjar-víc,--þar es
Ingolfs-haofðe callaðr, fyr austan Minþacs-eyre, sem hann com fyrst á
land: en þar Ingolfs-fell fyr vestan Olfoss-aó es hann lagðe sína eigo
á síðan. Í þann tíð vas Ísland15 viðe vaxet í miðle fiallz oc fiaoro.

3. Þá vóro her menn Cristner þeir es Norðmenn calla Papa. En þeir fóro
síðan á braut, af þvi at þeir vildo eige vesa her við heiðna menn:
oc léto epter boecr Írscar, oc biollor, oc bagla: af því mátte scilja
at þeir vóro menn Írscer.20

4. En þá varð faor manna mikil mioc út hingat úr Norvege, til þess unz
conungrenn Haralldr bannaðe, af þvi at hónom þótte land-auðn nema. Þá
sættosc þeir á þat, at hverr maðr scylde gialda conunge fimm aura,
sá es eige være frá því skiliðr, oc þaðan foere hingat.--En þat es
sagt at Haralldr være lxx vetra5 konungr, oc yrðe áttroeðr.--Þau
hafa upphaof vereð at gialde því es nu es kallað land-aurar. En þar
gallzc stundom meira, en stundom minna; unz Óláfr enn Digre goerðe
scýrt at hverr maðr scyllde giallda conunge halfa maork sá es foere
á miðle Norvegs ok Íslannz, nema conor, eða þeir menn es hann næme
frá.--Svá10 sagðe Þórkell oss Gellis sun.

2. 1. Hrollaugr, son Raognvallz iarls á Moere, bygðe austr á
Síðo--þaðan ero Síðo-menn comner.

Ketilbiaorn, Ketils son, maðr Noroenn, bygðe suðr at Mosfelle eno
OEfra--þaðan ero Mosfellingar comner.15

Qðr, dótter Ketils Flatnefs Hersis Noroens, bygðe vestr í
Breiða-firðe--þaðan ero Breiðfirðingar comner.

Helge enn Magre, Noroenn, son Eyvindar Austmannz, bygðe norðr í
Eyja-firðe--þaðan ero Eyfirðingar comner.

2. En þá es Ísland vas víða bygt orðet, þá hafðe maðr Austroenn20 fyrst
laog út hingat ur Norvege, sa es Ulfliótr hét.--Svá sagðe Teitr oss--oc
vóro þá Ulfliótz laog caolloð. Hann vas faðer Gunnars, es Diúpdoeler
'ro komner frá í Eyja-firðe. En þau vóro flest sett at því sem þá
vóro Gola-þings-laog, eða raóð Þórleifs ens Spaca Haorða-Cára sonar
vóro til, hvar við scyllde auca, eða af nema, eða annan veg setja.

3. Ulfliótr vas austr í Lóne. En svá es sagt at Grímr Geitscor5 være
fóst-bróðer hans, sá es cannaðe Ísland alt at ráðe hans áðr Alþinge
være átt. En hónom fecc hverr maðr pening á lande her; en hann gaf
þat fé síðan til hofs [1119].


3. 1. Alþinge vas sett at ráðe Ulfliótz oc allra lannz-manna þar es
nú es. En áðr vas þing á Kialar-nese, þat es10 Þórsteinn, Ingolfs
son Lannáma-mannz, faðer Þórkels Mána Laog­saogo-mannz hafðe þar,
oc haofðingjar þeir es at því hurfo.

2. En maðr hafðe secr orðet of þræls-morð eða leysings, sá es land átte
í Blá-scógom: hann es nefndr Þórer Croppin-skegge. En dóttor-sonr hans
es callaðr Þórvalldr Croppin-skegge, sá es fór15 síðan í Austfiaorðo,
oc brennde þar inne Gunnar bróðor sínn.--Svá sagðe Hallr Óroekio
son.--En sá hét Colr es myrðr vas: við hann es cennd geá sú es þar
es colloð síðan Cols geá, sem hræen fundosc. Land þat varð síðan
allz-herjar-fé. En þat laogðo lannz-menn til Alþingis neyzlo. Af því
es þar almenning at viða til Alþingis20 í scógom; oc á heiðom hage
til hrossa hafnar.--Þat sagðe Ulf­heðenn oss.

3. Svá hava oc spacer menn sagt, at á lx vetra yrðe Ísland al-bygt,
svá at eige være meirr síðan.

4. Því nær tóc Hramn laogsaogo, Hængs sonr lannáma-mannz, næstr
Ulflióte, oc hafðe xx sumor. Hann vas úr Rangár-hverfe. Þat vas
lx vetra epter dráp Eadmundar konungs, vetre [1120] eða tveim5 áðr
Haralldr enn Hárfagre yrðe dauðr, at taolo spacra manna.

5. Þórarenn Raga-bróðer, son Oleifs Hialta, tóc laogsaogo næstr Hramne,
oc hafðe aonnor xx (sumor [1121]). Hann vas Borgfirzcr.

4. 1. Þat vas oc, þá es ener spaocosto menn á lande her haofðo taleð
í tveim misserom fióra daga ens fiórða10 hundraðs--þat verða vicor
tvær ens sétta tegar, en maónoðr tolf þritoeg-náttar, oc dagar fiórer
umb fram.--Þá mercðo þeir at sólar-gange, at sumaret munaðe aptr til
várs-ens. En þat cunne enge maðr segja þeim, at dege einom vas fleira
an heilom vicom gegnde í tveim misserom: oc þat olle.15

2. En maðr hét Þórsteinn Surtr. Hann vas Breiðfirðscr, sonr Hallsteins,
Þórolfs sonar Mostrar-skeggja landnáma-mannz, oc Oscar Þórsteins dóttor
ens Rauða: hann dreymðe þat, at hann hugðesc vesa at Laogberge, þá
es þar vas fiolment, oc vaca; en hann hugðe alla menn aðra sofa. En
síðan hugðesc hann sofna,20 en hann hugðe þá alla aðra vacna. Þann
draum réð Osyfr Helga son, móðor-faðer Gellis Þórkels sonar, svá, at
aller menn mynde þagse verða [1122] meðan hann mælte at Laogberge;
en síðan es hann þagnaðe, at þá mynde aller þat róma es hann hafðe
mælt--en þeir vóro báðer spaker menn mioc. En síðan es menn qvómo til
þings, þá leitaðe hann ráðs at Laogberge, at et siaunda hvert sumar
scyllde auca vico; oc freista hve þá hlýdde. En svá sem Osyfr5 réð
draumenn, þá vaocnoðo aller menn við þat vel. Oc vas þá þat þegar í
laog leitt at ráðe Þórkels Mána oc annarra spacra manna.

3. At rétto tale (ero) í hverjo áre fimm dagar ens fiórða hundraðs, ef
eige es hlaup-ár; en þá einom fleira. En at óro tale10 verða fiórer. En
þá es eycsc at óro tale et siaunda hvert ár [1123] vico, en oengo
at hino, þá verða siau aór saman iamn-laong at hvaóro-tveggja. En
ef hlaup-aór verða tvau á miðle þeirra es auca skal, þat þarf auca
et sétta.

5. 1. Þinga-deild mikel varð á miðle þeirra Þórðar Gellis,15
sonar Oleifs Feilans, úr Breiðafirðe, oc Oddz, þess es kallaðr vas
Tungo-Oddr, hann vas Borgfirðscr. Þórvalldr son hans vas at brenno
Þórkels Blunn-Ketils sonar með Hoesna-Þóre í Ornolfs-dale. En Þórðr
Gellir varð haofðinge at saokenne, af þvi at Hersteinn, Þórkels son
Blunn-Ketils sonar, átte Þórunne systor-dóttor20 hans;--hon vas Helgo
dótter oc Gunnars, syster Iófríðar es Þórsteinn átte Egils son.--En
þeir vóro sótter á þinge því es vas í Borgar-firðe í þeim stað es síðan
es callat Þing-nes. Þat vóro þá laog, at víg-sacar scyllde soekja
á því þinge es næst vas vétt-vange. En þeir baorðosc þar, oc mátte
þingeð eige heyjasc at laogom. Þár fell Þórolfr Refr, bróðer Alfs
[1124] í Daolom úr liðe Þórðar Gellis. En síðan fóro sacarnar til
Alþingis [1125], oc baorðosc þeir þar þá enn. Þá5 fello [vi] [1126]
menn úr liðe Oddz; enda varð secr hann Hoesna-Þórer, oc drepenn síðan,
oc fleire þeir (es) at brennonne vóro.

2. Þá talðe Þórðr Geller taolo umb at Laogberge hve ílla maonnom
gegnde, at fara í ócunn þing at soekja of víg, eða harma sína [at reka]
[1127]; oc talðe hvat hónom varð fyrer, áðr harm mætte því mále10
til laga coma; oc qvað ymissa vandræðe moendo verða, ef eige réðesc
boetr á.

3. Þá vas landeno scipt í fiórðunga, sva at III urðo þing í hverjom
fiórðunge; oc scyldo þingo-nautar eiga hvar sac-sócner saman; nema í
Norðlendinga fiórðunge vóro IIII, af þvi at þeir15 urðo eige á annat
sátter. Þeir es fyr norðan vóro Eyja-fiaorð vildo eige þangat soekja
þingeð; oc eige í Scaga-fiaorð þeir es þar vóro fyr vestan. En þó
scylde iaofn dóm-nefna [1128] oc laogrétto-scipon úr þeirra fiórðunge
sem úr hverjom aoðrom [1129]. En síðan vóro sett fiórðungar-þing.--Svá
sagðe oss Ulfheðinn, Gunnars son, Laogsaogo-maðr.

4. Þórkell Máne, Þórsteins son, Ingolfs sonar, tóc laogsaogo epter
Þórarinn Raga-bróðor, oc hafðe XV sumor.

5. Þá hafðe Þórgeirr at Liósa-vatne, Þórkels son, XVII sumor.5

6. 1. Land þat, es callat es Groenland, fannsc oc bygðesc af
Íslande. Eirikr enn Rauðe hét maðr Breiðfirðscr, es fór út heðan
þangat; oc nam þar land es síðan es callaðr Eiriks-fiaorðr. Hann
gaf nafn landeno, oc callaðe Groen-land; ok qvað menn þat myndo fýsa
þangat farar, at landeð ætte nafn10 gótt.

2. Þeir fundo þar manna-vister bæðe austr oc vestr á lande, oc
keipla-brot oc stein-smíðe: þat es af því má scilja, at þar hafðe
þess-conar þióð fareð, es Vínland hefer byggt, oc Groenlendingar
calla Screlinga.15

3. En þat vas es hann tóc byggva landeð, xiiii vetrom eða XV fyrr an
Cristne qvæme her á Ísland, at því es sá talðe fyrer Þórkele Gellis
syne á Groenlande es siálfr fylgðe Eirike enom Rauða út.

7. 1. Óláfr rex Tryggva son, Óláfs sonar, Harallz sonar ens Hárfagra,
com Cristne í Norveg oc á Ísland.20 Hann sende hingat til lannz
prest þann es hét Þangbrandr [Sax­nescan at cyne] [1130], oc her
kende maonnom Cristne; oc scírðe þá alla es við trú tóco. En Hallr
á Síðo, Þórsteins son, [Baoðvars sonar ens Hvíta af Vors, es laond
nam í Alfta-firðe enom syðra, hann] [1131] lét scírasc snimhendis, oc
Hiallte Sceggja sonr úr Þiórsár-dale; oc Gizorr enn Hvíte Teitz son,
Ketilbiarnar sonar frá Mos­felle; oc marger haofðingjar aðrer. En
þeir vóro þó fleire es í5 gegn mælto oc neitto. [En Þangbrandr com
scipe síno í Alfta­fiaorð, oc vas at Þvátt-aó um vetrenn.] [1132]
En þá es hann hafðe her vereð einn vetr eða tvá, þá fór hann á braut,
oc hafðe veget her tvá menn eða þriá, þá es hann haofðo nítt. En hann
sagðe conungenom Óláfe, es hann com austr, allt þat es her hafðe yfer10
hann gingið; oc lét oervænt, at her moende cristnen [1133] tacasc. En
hann varð við þat reiðr mioc, oc ætlaðe at láta meiða eða drepa ossa
landa fyrer þá es þar vóro austr. En þat sumar et sama, qvómo út heðan
þeir Gizorr oc Hiallte, oc þógo þá undan við conungenn, oc héto hónom
umb-sýslo sínne til á nyja-leic, at her15 yrðe enn við cristninne
teket, oc léto ser eige annars vaón an þat [1134] moende hlýða. En
et næsta sumar efter fóro þeir austan, oc prestr sá es Þórmoðr hét,
oc qvómo þá í Vestmanna-eyjar, es x vicor vóro af sumre, oc hafðe
allt faresc vel at.--Svá qvað Teitr þann segja es sialfr vas þar.20

2. Þá vas þat mælt et næsta sumar áðr í laogom, at menn scyllde svá
coma til Alþingis, es tio vicor være af sumre, en þangat til qvómo
(menn) vico fyrr.

3. En þeir fóro þegar inn til megin-lannz, oc síðan til Alþingis;
oc gaóto at Hiallta, at hann vas efter í Laugar-dale með xii mann;
af því at hann hafðe áðr secr orðet fiorbaugs-maðr et næsta sumar
áðr á Alþinge of Goð-gaó. En þat vas til þess haft, at hann qvað at
Laogberge qviðling þenna:5


    Vil ec ... [1135] goð goeyja: groey þyccer mer Froeyja:
    [Æ man annat-tveggja Óðenn groey eðr Froeyja.] [1136]


4. En þeir Gizorr fóro unz þeir qvómo í stað þann í hiá Olfoss­vatne
es callaðr es Vellan-catla; oc goerðo orð þaðan til þings [1137],
at á móte þeim scyllde coma aller fulltings-menn þeirra; af þvi
at10 þeir haofðo spurt, at andscotar þeirra vilde verja þeim víge
þing-vaollenn. En fyrr an þeir foere þaðan þá com þar ríðande Hiallte,
oc þeir es epter vóro með hónom. En síðan riðo þeir á þinget; oc qvómo
áðr á mót þeim frændr þeirra oc viner, sem þeir haofðo æst. En ener
heiðno menn hurfo saman með alvæpne, oc hafðe15 stórom nær [1138],
at þeir mynde berjasc áðr viner hvárra-tveggja of genge á miðle [1139].

5. En annan dag epter gengo þeir Gizorr oc Hialte til Laogbergs,
oc baóro þar upp oerende sín. En svá es sagt, at þat bære frá hve
vel þeir mælto. En þat goerðesc af því, at þar nefnðe annarr20 maðr
at aoðrom vátta, oc saogðosc hvárer úr Laogom við aðra, ener Cristno
menn oc ener heiðno, oc gingo síðan frá Laogberge.

6. Þá baóðo ener Cristno menn Hall á Síðo, at hann scyllde laog þeirra
upp segja þau es Cristnenne scyllde fylgja. En hann leystesc því
undan við þá, at hann coeypte at Þórgeire laogsaogo-manne5 [halfre
maorc silfrs] [1140], at hann scyllde upp segja.--En hann vas enn
þá heiðenn.--En síðan es menn qvómo í búðer, þá lagðesc hann niðr
Þórgeirr, oc breidde feld sínn á sic, oc hvílðe þann dag allan, oc
nóttena efter, oc qvað ecci orð. En of morgonenn efter settesc hann
upp, oc goerðe orð, at menn scylde ganga til Laogbergis.10

7. En þá hóf hann taolo sína upp es menn qvómo þar, oc sagðe, at
hónom þótte þá comet hag manna í ónýtt efne, ef menn scyllde eige
hafa aller ein laog á lande her; oc talðe fyrer maonnom á marga vega,
at þat scyllde eige láta verða: oc sagðe at þat moende at því ósætte
verða, es vísa vaón vas, at þær bar-smíðer goerðesc15 á miðle manna
es landeð eyddesc af. Hann sagðe frá því, at conungar úr Norrege oc
úr Danmaorco haofðo haft ó-frið oc orrostor á miðle sín langa tíð
til þess unz lannz-menn [hvárs-tveggja] [1141] goerðo frið á miðle
þeirra, þótt þeir villde eige. En þat ráð goerðesc svá, at af stundo
sendosc þeir gersemar á miðle:20 enda héllt [1142] friðr sá meðan
þeir lifðo. 'En nu þyccer mer þat ráð,' qvað hann, 'at ver látem
oc eige þá ráða es mest vilja í gegn gangasc; oc miðlom svá maól
á miðle þeirra, at hvárer-tveggjo [1143] hafe nacqvat síns máls,
oc haofom aller ein laog oc einn sið. Þat mon verða satt, es [1144]
ver slítom sundr laogen, at ver monom slíta oc friðenn.' En hann
lauc svá síno mále, at hvárer-tveggjo iaótto því, at aller scyllde
ein laog hafa þau sem hann réðe upp at segja.

8. Þá vas þat mællt í laogom, at aller menn scyllde Cristner vesa,5 oc
scírn taca, þeir es áðr vóro óscírðer á lande her. En of barna út-burð
scylldo standa en forno laog, oc of hrossa-keotz át: scylldo menn
blóta á laun ef villdo; en varða fiorbaugs-garðr ef vaóttom of qvæme
við. En síðar faóm vetrom vas sú heiðne af numen sem aonnor.--Þenna
atburð sagðe Teitr oss, at því es Cristne com á Ísland.

9. En Óláfr Tryggva son fell et sama sumar, at saogo Sæmundar
prestz. Þá barðesc hann við Svein Harallz son Dana conung; oc Óláf
enn Soensca, Eirics son at Uppsaolom Svia conungs; ok Eiric es síðan
vas iarl at Norvege Hoconar son. Þat vas CXXX vetrom15 epter dráp
Eadmundar; en M epter burð Cristz at alþýðo tale.

8. 1. Þesse ero naofn byscopa þeirra es vereð hafa á Íslande
útlender, at saogo Teitz.--Friðrecr com í heiðne her. En þesser vóro
síðan:--Biarnharðr enn Bócvíse v aór: Colr faó aór. Hroðolfr XIX
aór. Iaohan enn Írske faó aór. Biarnharðr XIX aór.20 Heinrecr II aór.

2. Enn qvómo her aðrer v, þeir es byscopar qvóðosc vesa: Ornolfr oc
Goðiscolcr. Oc III Ermscer: Petrus, oc Abraham, oc Stephanus.

3. Grímr at Mosfelle, Svertings son, tóc laogsaogo epter Þórgeir;
oc hafðe ii sumor. En þá fecc hann lof til þess at Scapte5 Þóroddz
son hefðe, systor-son hans, af þvi at hann vas hás-mæltr sialfr.

4. Scapte hafðe laogsaogo xxvij sumor. Hann sette Fimtar-dóms-laog;
oc þat, at enge vegande scyllde lýsa víg á hendr aoðrom manne an ser;
en áðr vóro her slíc laog of þat sem í Norvege.10 Á hans daogom urðo
marger haofðingjar oc ríkis-menn seker eða land-flótta of víg eða
bar-smíðer af ríkis saocom hans oc land-stiórn. En hann andaðesc á
eno sama áre oc Óláfr enn Digre fell, Harallz son, Goðroeðar sonar,
Biarnar sonar, Harallz sonar ens Hárfagra, XXX vetrom síðarr an Óláfr
felle Tryggva son.15

5. Þá tóc Steinn Þórgestz son laog-saogo, oc hafðe iii sumor.

6. Þá hafðe Þórkell Tiorva son XX sumor.

7. Þá hafðe Geller Bolverks son IX sumor.

9. 1. Ísleifr, Gizorar son ens Hvíta, vas vígðr til byscops á
daogom Harallz Norvegs conungs, Sigurðar sonar,20 Halfdanar [1145]
sonar, Sigurðar sonar Hrísa, Harallz sonar ens Hárfagra.--En es þat
saó haofðingjar oc góðer menn, at Ísleifr vas myklo nýtre an aðrer
kenne-menn, þeir es á þvísa lande næðe, þá selldo hónom marger sono
sína til læringar, oc léto vígja til presta. Þeir urðo síðan vígðer
ii til byscopa: Collr es vas í Víc austr, oc Ioan at Hólom.

2. Ísleifr átte iii sono; þeir urðo aller haofðingjar nýter:5 Gizorr
byscop; oc Teitr prestr, faðer Hallz; oc Þórvalldr [1146]. Teit foedde
Hallr í Hauka-dale, sá maðr, es þat vas al-mællt, at mill-dastr være
oc ágæztr at góðo á lande her ólærðra manna. Ec com til Hallz vii
vetra gamall, vetre epter þat es Geller Þórkels son, faoðor-faðer
mínn oc fóstre, andaðesc; oc vase þar xiiii vetr.10

3. Gunnarr enn Space hafðe teket laog-saogo þá es Geller lét af,
oc hafðe iii sumor.

4. Þá hafðe Colbeinn, Flosa son, vi (sumor). Þat sumar es hann tóc
laog-saogo fell Haralldr rex á Englande.

5. Þá hafðe Geller í annat sinn iiii sumor.15

6. Þá hafðe Gunnarr í annat sinn i sumar.

7. Þá hafðe Sighvatr Surtz son, systor-son Colbeins, viii (sumor). Á
þeim [1147] daogom com Sæmundr Sigfússon sunnan af Fracclande hingat
til lannz, oc lét síðan vígjasc til prestz.

8. Ísleifr vas vígðr til byscops þá es hann vas fimtoegr. Þá vas20
Leo nonus [1148] Pave. En hann vas enn næsta vetr í Norvege, oc fór
síðan út hingat. En hann andaðesc í Scála-hollte, þá es hann hafðe
allz veret byscop iiii vetr oc XX.--Svá sagðe Teitr oss.

Þat vas á Dróttens-dege vi nóttom epter hátíð þeirra Pettars [1149]
ok Pols, lxxx vetra epter Óláfs fall Tryggva sonar. Þar vas ec þá
með Teite fóstra mínom, tolf vetra gamall.

9. En Hallr sagðe oss svá, es bæðe vas minnigr ok ólýgenn, oc
munðe sialfr þat es hann vas scírðr, at Þangbrandr scírðe hann5
þre-vetran. En þat vas vetre fyrr an Cristne være her í laog teken. En
hann goerðe bú þrítoegr, oc bió lxiiij vetr í Hauka-dale, oc hafðe
xciiij vetr þá es hann andaðesc. En þat vas of hótíð Martens byscops
á enom x [1150] vetre epter andlát Ísleifs [1151] byscops.

10. 1. Gizorr byscop, sonr Ísleifs, vas vígðr til byscops, at10
boen lannz-manna, á daogom Óláfs conungs, Harallz sonar, ii vetrom
epter þat es Ísleifr andaðesc: þann vas hann annan her á lande, en
annan á Gautlande.--En þat vas namn hans rétt [1152], at hann hét
Gisroeðr.--Svá sagðe hann oss.

2. Márcus Sceggja son hafðe laog-saogo næstr Sighvate, oc tóc15 þat
sumar, es Gizorr byscop hafðe einn vetr vereð her á lande; en fór með
iiii sumor oc XX. At hans saogo es scrifoð æve allra laogsaogo-manna
á bóc þesse, þeirra es vóro fyrer várt minne. En hónom sagðe Þórarenn
bróðer hans, oc Scegge faðer þeirra, oc fleire spaker menn, til þeirra
æve es fyrer hans minne vóro: at20 því es Biarne enn Spake hafðe sagt,
faoðor-faðer þeirra, es munðe Þórarenn laogsaogo-mann oc vi aðra síðan.

3. Gizorr byscop vas ástsælle af aollom lannz-maonnom an hverr maðr
annarra, þeirra es ver vitom [1153] her á lande hafa vereð. Af
ást-sælð hans, oc af taolom þeirra Sæmundar [prestz] [1154], með
umbráðe Márcus laogsaogo-mannz [oc fleire spakra manna] [1155] vas
þat í laog leitt, at aller menn [á lande her þeir es eige vóro frá
numner] [1156] taolðo5 oc virðo allt fé sítt, oc sóro at rétt virt
være, hvárt sem vas í laondom eða í lausa-aurom, oc goerðo tíund af
síðan. Þat ero miclar iartegner [1157] hvat hlýðner lannz-menn vóro
þeim manne, es hann com því framm, at fé alt vas virt með svar-daogom
[1158], þat es á Íslande vas; oc landet sialft; oc tíunder af goervar;
oc laog á10 laogð, at svá scal vesa meðan Ísland es byggt.

4. Gizorr byscop lét oc laog leggja á þat, at stóll byscops þess es
á Íslande være, scyllde í Scála-hollte vesa; en áðr vas hverge. Oc
lagðe hann þar til stólsens Scála-holltz-land, oc margra cynja auðoefe
aonnor, bæðe í laondom oc lausom aurom.15

5. En þá es hónom þótte sá staðr hafa vel at auðoefom [1159] þróasc,
þá gaf hann meirr an fiórðung byscops-dóms síns til þess at heldr
være ii byscops-stólar á lande her, an einn, svá sem Norðlendingar
æsto hann til.

6. En hann hafðe áðr láteð telja buendr á lande her; oc vóro20 þá í
Austfirðinga fiórðunge VII hundroð heil: en í Rangæinga-fiórðunge X
(hundroð): en í Breiðfirðinga-fiórðunge IX: en í OEyfirðinga fiórðunge
XII. En ótalðer vóro þeir es eige aótto þing-farar-caupe at gegna of
allt Ísland.

7. Ulfheðinn, Gunnars son ens Spaca, tóc laog-saogo epter Márcus,
oc hafðe IX sumor.

8. Þá hafðe Bergþórr, Hrafns son, VI (sumor) [1160].5

[8. b. En þá hafðe Goðmundr Þórgeirs son xii sumor.] [1161]

9. Et fyrsta sumar es Bergþórr sagðe laog upp, vas nýmæle þat goert,
at laog or skyllde scrifa á bóc at Hafliða Móss sonar, of vetrenn
epter, at saogo oc umbráðe þeirra Bergþórs oc annarra spacra manna,
þeirra es til þess vóro tecner. Scylldo þeir goerva10 nýmæle þau
aoll í laogom, es þeim litesc þau betre an en forno laog. Scyllde þau
segja upp et næsta sumar epter í Laogrétto, oc þau aoll halda [1162]
es enn meire hlutr manna mælte þá eige gegn. En þat varð at fram fara,
at þá vas scrifaðr Víg-slóðe, oc mart annat í laogom, oc sagt upp í
Laogrétto af kenne-maonnom of sumar-et15 epter [1163]. En þat lícaðe
aollom vel, oc mælte því mange í gegn.

10. Þat vas oc et fyrsta sumar es Bergþórr sagðe laog upp: þá vas
Gizorr byscop óþingfoerr af sótt; þá sende hann orð til Alþingis vinom
sínom oc haofðingjom, at biðja scyllde Þórlac Rúnolfs son, Þórleiks
sonar, bróðor Hallz í Hauka-dale, at hann scyllde láta20 vígjasc til
byscops. En þat goerðo aller svá sem orð hans qvómo til. Oc fécsc þat
af því, at Gizorr hafðe sialfr fyrr mioc beðet. Oc fór hann útan þat
sumar; en com út et næsta epter, oc vas þá vígðr til byscops.

11. Gizorr vas vígðr til byscops þá es hann vas fertoegr; þá vas
Gregorius septimus pape.  En síðan vas hann enn næsta vetr í Danmaorco,
oc com of sumaret epter hingat til lannz. En þá es5 hann hafðe vereð
xxiiij vetr byscop, svá sem faðer hans, þá vas Ioan, Ogmundar son,
vígðr til byscops fyrstr til stóls at Hólom. Þá vas hann vetre miðr
an half-sextoegr [1164]. En xii vetrom síðarr, þá es Gizorr hafðe
allz vereð byscop xxxvj vetra, þá vas Þórlácr vígðr til byscops. Hann
lét Gizorr vígja til stóls í Scála-holte at ser10 lifanda. Þá vas
Þórlácr ii vetrom miðr an xxx. En Gizorr byscop andaðesc xxx nóttom
[1165] síðarr í Scála-holte á enom þriðja dege í vico [v] [1166]
kalend. Junij.

12. Á því áre eno sama obiit, Paschalis secundus pape fyrr an Gizorr
byscop; oc Baldvine Iorsala conungr; oc Arnaldus patriarcha15 í
Hierosalem [1167]; oc Philippus Svia [1168] conungr. En síðarr et
sama sumar, Alexius Grickja conungr, þá hafðe hann xxxviij vetr seteð
at stóle í Micla-garðe. En ii vetrom síðar varð Allda-mót. Þá haofðo
þeir Eysteinn oc Sigurðr vereð xviij vetr conungar í Norvege epter
Magnús faoðor sínn Óláfs son, Harallz20 sonar. Þat vas cxx [1169]
vetrom epter fall Óláfs Tryggva sonar; en ccl epter dráp Eadmundar
Engla-conungs; [en tvau hundroð oc fimm tiger, eðr nær því, efter es
Ingolfr land-náms-maðr com til Íslannz] [1170] en dxvj vetrom epter
andlát Gregorius pava þess es Cristne com á England: at því es taleð
es. En hann andaðesc á aoðro áre conungdóms Foco keisara, dciiij vetrom
epter burð Cristz at Almanna tale. Þat verðr allt saman mcxx aór.5

Her lýcsc [1171] siá bóc.

Þetta es cyn byscopa Íslendinga oc Ættar-tala.

Ketilbiaorn land-náms-maðr, sá es bygðe suðr at Mosfelle eno OEfra,
vas faðer Teitz, faoðor Gizorar ens Hvíta, faoðor Ísleifs, es fyrstr
vas byscop í Scála-hollte, faoðor Gizorar byscops.10

Hrollaugr land-náms-maðr, sa es bygðe austr á Síðo á Breiða-bólstað,
vas faðer Ozorar, faoðor Þórdísar, móðor Hallz á Síðo, faoðor Egils,
faoðor Þórgerðar, móðor Ioans, es fyrstr vas byscop at Hólom.

Oðr land-náms-kona, es bygðe vestr í Breiða-firðe í Hvamme,15 vas
móðer Þórsteins ens Rauða, faoðor Óleifs Feilans, faoðor Þórðar Gellis,
faoðor Þórhilldar Riúpo, móðor Þórðar Hesthaofða, faoðor Carlsefnis,
faoðor Snorra, faoðor Hallfríðar, móðor Þórlács, es nu es byscop í
Scála-hollte næstr Gizore.

Helge enn Magre land-náma-maðr, sá es bygðe norðr í Eyja-firðe20 í
Crist-nese, vas faðer Helgo, móðor Einars, faoðor Eyjolfs Valgerðar
sonar, faoðor Goðmundar [1172], faoðor Eyjolfs, faoðor Þórsteins,
faoðor Ketils, es nú es byscop at Hólom næstr Ioanne.

Þesse ero naofn langfeðga Ynglinga oc Breiðfirðinga:

I. Yngue Tyrkja-conungr. II. Niaorðr Svia
conungr. III. Froeyr. IIII. Fiolner, sá es
dó at Frið-Fróða. V. Svegðer. VI. Vanlande.5
VII. Visburr. VIII. Dómalldr. IX. Dómarr. X. Dyggve. XI. Dagr.
XII. Alrecr. XIII. Agne. XIIII. Yngve. XV. Iorundr. XVI. Aun enn
Gamle. XVII. Egill Vendil-craca. XVIII. Óttarr. XIX. Aðisl
at Uppsaolom. XX. Eysteinn. XXI. Yngvarr. XXII.
Braut-Qnundr. XXIII. Ingialldr enn Illráðe. XXIIII. Óláfr
Tré­telgja.10 XXV. Halfdan Hvítbeinn Upplendinga
conungr. XXVI. Goðroeðr. XXVII. Óláfr. XXVIII. Helge. XXIX. Ingialldr,
dóttor-sonr Sigurðar Ragnars sonar Loðbrócar. XXX. Óleifr
enn Hvíte. XXXI. Þórsteinn enn Rauðe. XXXII. Óleifr Feilan es
fyrstr bygðe þeirra á Íslande. XXXIII. Þórðr Geller. XXXIIII.15
Eyiolfr, es scírðr vas í elle sínne þá es Cristne kom á
Ísland. XXXV. Þórkell. XXXVI. Geller, faðer þeirra Þórkels faoðor
Brannz, ok Þórgils, faoðor [1173] míns: en ec heiter Are.







Here beginneth the little Book of the Icelanders.

1. 1. Iceland was first settled out of Norway in the days of Harold
Fair-hair, the son of Half-dan the Swarthy, in the time--according
to the belief and count of Tait, my foster-father, the wisest man
whom I knew, the son of bishop Is-laf, and of my father's brother
Thor-kell, Gelle's son, who could remember far back, and of Thor-id,
daughter of Snorre the priest, who was both wise in many things and
a truthful narrator [of the history of the past]--when Ingw-here,
son of Regin-here Lod-broc [Shag-breech], let slay Edmund the saint,
the king of the English. And that was 870 winters after the birth of
Christ, according to what is written in the history of him.

2. Ing-wolf was the name of a Northern [Norwegian] man that truly
is said to have journeyed first from there to Iceland, when Harold
Fair-hair was sixteen winters old, and again a second time a few
winters later. He settled south in Reek-wick, at a place called
Ing-wolf's head, east from Min-thac's Eyre, where he first came to
land, and it is called Ing-wolf's-fell, west of Olfos-water, where
he took up his possession afterwards. At that time Iceland was grown
with wood between fell and foreshore.

3. There were then here Christian men, whom the Northmen call 'papa,'
but afterwards they went away because they would not be here with
heathen men, and left behind them Irish books and bells and crooks,
whereby it might be perceived that they were Irishmen.

4. And then there came about a very great journeying of men out hither
from Norway, until Harold the king forbade it, because he thought
it would end in leaving the land empty. Then they settled this, that
every man who went thence hither and who was not dispensed therefrom,
should pay the king five ounces.

And it is said that Harold was king seventy winters, and was an eighty
years old man. That was the beginning of paying what is now called
land-ounce, or toll, and this was paid sometimes more, and sometimes
less, until An-laf the Thick made it clear that every man should pay
the king half a mark who should journey between Norway and Iceland,
save women and such men as he excepted. So Thor-kell Gelle's son
told us.


2. 1. ?rod-laug, son of Regin-wald, earl in More, took up his
settlement in the east on Side, whence the Men o' Side are come.

Cetil-beorn Cetil's son, a Norwegian man, took up his settlement in
the south at the upper Moss-fell, whence the Moss-fell-men are come.

Aod, the daughter of Cetil Flat-neb, a Norwegian herse or lord, took up
her settlement in the west in Broad-frith, whence the Broad-frith-men
are come.

Helge the Lean, a Norwegian, the son of Ey-wind, the east-man,
took up his settlement in the north in Ey-frith, whence are come
the Ey-frith-men.

2. And when Iceland was become widely settled, then did an eastern-man,
who was called Wolf-leod or Ulf-liod, first bring out hither laws
[i. e. Constitution] from Norway--so Tait told us--and they were called
Wolf-leod's laws [i.e. the Constitution of Ulf-liod]. He was the father
of Gun-here, from whence the Deep-dale-men are come in Ey-frith,
and the laws were mostly set according as Gula Moot's Laws were set
at that time, or according to the counsels of Thor-laf the Wise,
the son of Horda-Care, with regard to what should be added thereto
or taken therefrom, or set in another way.

3. Wolf-leod was east in Lone, and it is told that Grim Goat-crop was
his sworn-brother, the man who explored all Iceland, by the counsel
of Wolf-leod, before the All-moot was held.

And every man in the land here gave him a penny for it, and he gave
the money afterwards to the temples [read the Temple of the All-moot].

3. 1. The All-moot was set by counsel of Wolf-leod and of all the men
of the land where it now is, but before the Moot was at Keel-ness,
which Thor-stan, son of Ing-wolf the Settler, the father of Thor-kell
Moon, the Law-speaker, held there, and those chiefs that turned
thereto.

2. But a man that owned the land at Blue-shaw had been made an outlaw
for the murder of a thrall or freedman. His name is given as Thore
Crop-beard, and his daughter's son is called Thor-wald Crop-beard,
the man who afterwards journeyed into East-frith, and there burnt
Gun-here, his own brother, in his house--so Hall Oreykia's son
said. And he that was murdered was called Col, and the rift that
has ever since been called Cols-geow, where his carcase was found,
is called after him, and that piece of land afterwards became the
Land of the Whole Congregation, and the men of the land set it apart
for the maintenance of the All-moot, wherefore there is a common for
wood for the All-moot in the Shaw, and on the heath pasture for the
keeping of the horses. This Wolf-hedin or Ulf-hedin told us.

3. Moreover, wise men have said that in sixty winters Iceland was
all settled over, so that there was no more settlement made afterwards.

4. Next after this Raven, the son of Hæng the Settler, took the
speakership next after Wolf-leod, and he held it twenty winters. He
was out of Rang-water-thorp or wharf. That was sixty winters after the
slaying of king Eadmund, a winter or two before Harold Fair-hair died,
by the count of wise men.

5. Thor-arin Rage's brother, son of Oleif the Shelty, took the
speakership next after Raven, and held it other twenty winters. He
was a Borg-frith-man.

4. 1. It was also then that the wisest men here in the land kept count
in the two seasons four days of the fourth hundred [4 + 360], that
makes two weeks of the sixth ten [52] and twelve months of thirty
nights, and four days over. Then they marked by the course of the
sun that the summer was moving backward to the spring. But no one
could tell them that by one day there was more than a whole week's
quotient in the two seasons, and that was the reason thereof.

2. But there was a man named Thor-stan the Black: he was a
Broad-frither, the son of Hal-stan, son of Thor-wolf Mostr-beardie
the Settler, and of Osc, daughter of Thor-stan the Red. He dreamed
that he thought he was on the Rock of the Laws when there was a great
gathering, and he was awake, but he thought that all other men were
asleep. And afterwards he thought he was asleep, and he thought that
all other men were awake. This dream Os-wif Helge's son, the mother's
father of Gelle Thor-kell's son, read thus--that all men should be
silent while he was speaking at the Rock of the Laws, and after,
when he was silent, that then all should shout in applause of what
he had spoken. Now both of these were very wise men. And afterwards,
when men came to the Moot, then he proposed this counsel at the
Rock of the Laws that every seventh summer they should add a week,
and try how that answered. But just as Os-wif read the dream all men
wakened up to it fairly, and it was at once made law by the counsel
of Thor-kell Moon and other wise men.

3. By right count there are in every year five days of the fourth
hundred [5 + 360] if it be not leap-year, but if it be then there
is one day more, but according to our count there are four days,
but since there is an addition according to our count every seventh
year of a week, but other years of none, therefore every seven years
together will be equally long by both counts. But if two leap-years
fall between the years which have to be added to [the eke-years]
then it is necessary to make the addition to the sixth year [not
the seventh].

5. 1. A great Moot-suit came about between Thord Gelle, son of An-laf
Feilan of Broad-frith, and Ord, who was called Ord o' Tongue. He was
a Borg-frither.  His son Thor-wald was at the burning of Thor-kell,
Blund-Cetil's son, with Hen-Thore o' Erne-wolf's-dale. But Thord
Gelle was the chief in the suit, because Her-stan, son of Thor-kell,
Blund-Cetil's son, had Thor-und his sister's daughter to wife. She
was the daughter of Helge and Gun-here, and sister of Io-frith, whom
Thor-stan, Egil's son, had to wife. And the suit was taken at the
Moot that was in Borg-frith, in the place that was afterwards called
Thing-ness or Moot-ness. It was then law that suits for slaughter must
be followed up at the moot that was nearest to the field of the dead
[locus actionis], but they fell to battle, and the moot could not be
carried on by law. There fell Thor-wolf Ref, brother of Alf a Dale,
out of the company of Thord Gelle. And afterwards they took the cases
to the All-moot, and there they fell to battle again. Then six men
fell of Ord's company, and he (Hen-Thore) was outlawed and afterwards
slain, and more of them that were at the burning.

2. Then Thord Gelle spoke at the Rock of Laws thereon--how ill it
suited men to go to strange moots to sue for slaughter or any injury:
and he spake of what things there were in his own way before he could
bring the matter to law, and he said that others in their turns would
have these troubles unless some better counsel were taken.

3. Then the land was divided into Quarters, so that there were three
moots in each Quarter, and moot-mates in each should all have their
suits together, save that in the North-land-men's Quarter there were
four moots, because they could not otherwise agree, for they that were
north of Ey-frith would not seek to a moot there, nor they that were
west to Skaw-frith; but yet there should be the same court-choosing
or naming and the same law-court-ship [quota to the law-court] out of
this quarter of theirs as out of any one of the others. And afterwards
there were established Quarter-moots, so Ulf-hedin, Gun-here's son,
the Law-speaker, told us.

4. Thor-kell Moon, son of Thor-stan Ing-wolf's son, took the
Speakership of the Laws after Thor-arin, Rage's brother, and held it
fifteen summers.

5. Then Thor-gar o' Light-water, the son of Thor-kell, held it
seventeen summers.

6. 1. The land that is called Greenland was found and settled from
Iceland. Eiric the Red was the name of a Broad-frith-man that went
out hence thither, and took in settlement there the land that is
since called Eiric's-frith. He gave the land a name, and called it
Greenland, and said that men would be ready to go thither if the land
had a good name.

2. They found there men's habitations both east and west in the land,
both broken cayaks and stone-smithery, whereby it may be seen that
the same kind of folk had been there as they which inhabit Wine-land,
and whom the men of Greenland [Europeans] call Scraelings [the Eskimo].

3. But it was, when this land began to be settled, fourteen or fifteen
winters before that Christendom came here to Iceland, according to
what a man who himself went out with Eiric the Red told Thor-kell
Gelleson in Greenland.

7. 1. An-laf [or Olaf] Rex, the son of Tryggve, the son of An-laf,
the son of Harold Fair-hair, brought Christendom into Norway and
into Iceland. He sent hither to the land the priest that was called
Thang-brand, and he here taught men Christendom, and baptized all
them that received the faith. But Hall o' Side, the son of Thor-stan,
let himself be baptized at the first, and Shelty Scegge's son of
Thurs-water-dale, and Gizor the White, the son of Tait, the son of
Cetil-beorn's son of Moss-fell, and many other chiefs. Nevertheless
they were the more part that spake against and refused it. [Odd the
Monk's copy reads: But Thang-brand came in his ship to Elfet's-frith,
and was at Thwart-water through the winter.] And when he had been
there one winter or two, then he went away, and he slew here two or
three men who had libelled him. But he told king An-laf when he came
east all that had passed over him here, and made it known that it was
hopeless that Christendom should yet be received here. But the king
grew very wroth at this, and was about to have those of our land
murdered or slain who were then in the east. But that same summer
Gizor and Shelty came out hence, and got the king to let them off,
for they promised him their stewardship towards a new trial that
Christendom might still be accepted here, and they told him that they
had hoped nothing else but that it should be successful. And the next
summer afterwards they went from the east, and the priest that was
named Thor-mod, and came into the West-men's-Islands when ten weeks
of the summer were past, and they had had a good passage. So Tait
told that a man, who was himself there, said.

2. It was made law the next summer before this that men should come
to the All-moot when ten weeks of the summer were gone, but hitherto
men used to come the week before.

3. But they went at once to the mainland and then to the All-moot,
and got Shelty to stay behind in Bath-dale with eleven men, because
he had formerly been made a lesser outlaw the summer before at the
All-moot for blasphemy, and this was done because he spake this ditty
at the Rock of the Laws:--


    The god of graves I will blaspheme: Freyja a bitch I deem.
    One of the twain must ever be: a bitch, Woden or his Ladye.


4. But Gizor and they that were with him came to the place hard by
Aul-fus-mere, that is called Welling-kettle, and thence sent word to
the Moot that all the men of their party should come to meet them,
because they had heard that their adversaries would try to keep them
off the Moot-field by force of arms. But before that they set forth
thence Shelty came riding to them with them that had stayed behind
with him. [Shelty had brought out with him two great crosses, and one
of them was the height of king An-laf, and Shelty took them with him
to the Moot. So Odd the Monk reads.] And then they rode to the Moot,
and their kinsmen and friends whom they had asked were there already
to meet them. But the heathen men gathered together full armed, and
it came mighty near to their fighting together till friends of both
sides went between them [to part them].

5. But the next day after Gizor and Shelty went to the Rock of Laws,
taking the crosses to the Rock of Laws, and there mooted their errand,
and it said that it was passing strange how well they spoke.

And thereby it came to pass that one man after another began to call
witness, and declare himself out of law with the others, the Christians
and the heathen, and then they went away from the Rock of Laws.

6. Then the Christian men asked Hall o' Side to speak them a law which
the Christians should follow; but he got clear of this by feeing
Thor-gar the Law-speaker that he should speak them, though he was
still a heathen. And then when men went to the booths, he (Thor-gar)
lay down and spread his rug over him, and so lay all that day and the
night after, and spake never a word. But the next morning he sat up
and gave the word for men to go to the Rock of Laws.

7. And as soon as men were come there he began his speech, and
said that he thought that the condition of the people would be a
sorry plight, if men were not all to have one constitution here in
the land. And he spake to men in many ways that they should never
let this come about, saying that such disturbance must follow that
assaults and batteries would be sure to follow between men, so that
the land would be laid waste therefore. He showed forth how the kings
of Norway and Denmark had carried on war and battles between them for
a long time, till the men of those countries made peace between them,
though they [the kings] wished it not; and this counsel turned out so
[well] that within a little while the kings sent each other gifts
and kept the peace as long as they lived. And now this seems to me
the best counsel, that we do not let their will prevail who are most
eager against each other, but let us so umpire the cases between the
two sides that each side may win part of his case, and let us all
have one law and one faith. For this will be a true saying that if
we break asunder the constitution we shall also break the peace. And
he ended his speech so that each side agreed to this, that all should
have one law, and that the one which he should declare law.

8. Then it was made law that all men should be Christians, and they
should take baptism that were yet unbaptized here in the land; but
that as to the exposure of children the old laws should stand, and also
as to the eating of horse-flesh. Men might sacrifice secretly if they
wished, but they should be under the lesser outlawry if witnesses could
be brought forward thereto. But a few winters later this heathendom
was taken away like the rest. This which came to pass Tait told us,
how that Christendom came to Iceland.

9. But An-laf Tryggvason fell the same summer, according to what
Sæ-mund the priest says. There were then fighting against him, Swain
Haraldsson, the king of the Danes, and An-laf the Swedish, son of
Eiric of Upsal king of the Swedes, and Eiric Haconsson, that was
afterwards earl in Norway. That was one hundred and thirty winters
after the slaughter of Ead-mund, and one thousand after the birth of
Christ, according to the general count [the church chronology].

8. 1. These are the names of the bishops that have been in Iceland,
strangers, according to the saying of Tait. Frith-rec came here in
the heathen days, but these were later: Bearn-hard the Book-wise,
five years; Col, four years; Hroth-olf, nineteen years; Johan the
Irish, four years; Bearn-hard, nineteen years; Heinrec, two years.

2. And there came here other five that said they were bishops: Ern-wolf
and Gothi-scolc, and three Armenians--Petrus and Abraham and Stephanus.

3. Grim o' Moss-fell, the son of Swerting, took the Law-speakership
after Thor-gar, and held it two summers, and then he got leave that
Scapte or Shafto, Thor-ord's son, his sister's son, should have it,
because he was hoarse of speech himself.

4. Shafto held the Law-speakership twenty-seven winters. He established
the constitution of the Fifth Court; and also this, that no man should
legally declare a slaughter as done by any one else than himself;
but before these were here such law on this point as in Norway. In
his days were many chiefs and mighty men outlawed or exiled for
slaughter or assault by means of his might and rule of the law; but
he died in the same year as An-laf the Stout fell, the son of Harold,
the son of God-fred, the son of Beorn, the son of Harold Fair-hair,
thirty winters later than An-laf Tryggvason fell.

5. Then Stan Thor-gest's son took the Law-speakership, and held it
three summers.

6. Then Thor-kell Tyrve's son held it twenty summers.

7. Then Gelle Bale-work's son held it nine summers.

9. 1. Is-laf, the son of Gizor the White, was hallowed bishop in the
days of Harold king of Norway, the son of Sig-rod, the son of Half-dan,
the son of Sig-rod Wrise, the son of Harold Fair-hair. But when the
chiefs and good-men saw that Is-laf was much more accomplished than
other clerks that could be got in this land, then many of them gave him
their sons as his disciples, and had them hallowed as priests. Two of
them were afterwards hallowed bishops--Col that was east in the Wick,
and John at Holar.

2. Is-laf had three sons: they were all accomplished chiefs--Gizor the
bishop, and Tait the priest, the father of Hall and Thor-wald. Tait
was brought up by Hall in Hawk-dale, the man that was said by all to
be the most generous and most worshipful in all good of all laymen
here in this land. I also came to Hall, seven winters old, the winter
after Gelle Thorkellson, my father's father and fosterer died, and
I was then fourteen years.

3. Gun-here the Wise had taken the Law-speakership when Gelle
[Bale-work's son] gave it up, and held it three summers.

4. Then Col-bain, Flose's son, held it six. The summer he took the
Law-speakership Rex Harold fell in England.

5. Then Gelle held it a second time three summers.

6. Then Gun-here held it a second time one summer.

7. Then Sig-hwat, Surt's son, Col-ban's sister's son, had it eight. In
those days came Sæ-mund Sig-fusson hither to the land, from the
south-east of Frankland, and had himself hallowed priest.

8. Is-laf was hallowed bishop when he was fifty (Leo Nonus
[MS. Septimus] was then pope); but he was the next winter in Norway,
and afterwards came out hither, and he died at Scal-holt when he had
been bishop four-and-seventy years. So Tait told us.

It was on the Lord's-day, six nights after the feast of Peter and
Paul [July 6], eighty winters after the fall of An-laf Tryggvason,
I was there with Tait my foster-brother, twelve years old.

9. But Hall told us, who was both of good memory and truthful, that
he could remember himself how he was baptized; that Thang-brand
baptized him when he was three years old, and that was a winter
before Christendom was made law here. But he set up house-keeping
at the age of thirty, and dwelt sixty-four winters in Hawk-dale, and
was ninety-four years old when he died. And that was on the feast of
bishop Martin, the tenth winter after the death of bishop Is-laf.

10. 1. Bishop Gizor, Is-laf's son, was hallowed bishop at the prayer
of the people of the country in the days of king An-laf, Harold's
son, two winters, after Is-laf died. He was then one year here in
the country, and the other in Gautland. But his true name was that
he was called Gis-red, so he told us.

2. Marcus Skegge's son had the Law-speakership next after Sig-hwat,
and he took it up the summer that bishop Gizor had been one winter here
in the land, and carried it on four-and-twenty summers. According to
his words are written the Lives of all the Law-speakers in this book,
of them which were before our memory. But Thor-arin his brother told
him, and Scegge their father, and other wise men, as to the lives
of those who were before his memory, according as Biarne the Wise,
their father's father, had told them, who remembered Thor-arin the
Law-speaker and six others after him.

3. Bishop Gizor was better beloved by all the people of the land than
any other man whom we know to have been here on the land. For the love
he was held in, and by reason of the speeches he and Sæ-mund made,
and by the counsel of Marcus the Law-speaker it was made law that
all men should count and value all their wealth, and swear what the
true worth was, whether it were in land or chattels, and then give
tithes thereof. That is a great token of how obedient the people of
the country were to this man that he should be able to bring it about
that all wealth should be valued under oath that was then in Iceland,
and tithes given of it, and a law laid down that that should last as
long as Iceland is inhabited.

4. Bishop Gizor also had it laid down as law that the see of the bishop
that was in Iceland should be in Scal-holt, for before it was nowhere;
and he endowed the see of Scal-holt with land and many kind of riches
besides, both in land and chattels.

5. And when he thought that this stead [see] was well thriven with
wealth, then he gave away more than the fourth part of his bishopric,
so that there might be rather two bishops' sees in the land here than
one, as the Northland men asked him to.

6. And ere this he had let tell [the numbers of] the franklins that
were here in the land; and there were then in the East-frith-men's
Quarter, seven hundred full [840]; and in the Rang-water-men's Quarter,
ten [1200]; and in the Broad-frith-men's Quarter, nine [1080]; and
in Ey-frith-men's Quarter, twelve [1440]; but they were untold who
had not to pay Moot-fare-gild in all Iceland.

7. Wolf-Hedin, son of Gun-here the Wise, took the Law-speakership
after Marcus, and held it nine summers.

8. Then Berg-thor Raven's son six [summers].

[8. b. And then God-mund Thor-gar's son twelve summers.]

9. The first summer that Berg-thor spoke the law, this novella was
made, that our law should be written in a book by Haf-lidi Marson
the winter after, according to the speech and counsel of Berg-thor
and other wise men who were chosen therefore. They were to make all
the novellae in the land, which they should deem better than the old
laws, and they were to be declared the next summer after in the Court
of Laws, and keep all those which the greater part of men said nought
against. And it came to pass that the Man-slaughter Section was then
written by clerks, and many another thing in the laws, and declared
in the Court of Laws the summer after, and it pleased all well,
and no one spoke against it.

10. It was also the first summer that Berg-thor declared the law that
bishop Gizor was not able to go to the Moot by reason of sickness. Then
he sent word to the All-moot to his friends and the chiefs that they
should ask Thor-lac, Run-wolf's son, the son of Thor-lac, the brother
of Hall o' Hawk-dale, that he should let himself be hallowed bishop,
and all that his word came to did so, and it came about because Gizor
himself had asked it much before. And he [Thor-lac] went abroad that
summer, and came out the next after and was then hallowed bishop.

11. Gizor was hallowed bishop when he was forty; Gregorius Septimus
was then pope; and then he was the next winter in Denmark, and
came the summer afterwards hither to the land. And when he had
been four-and-twenty winters bishop, as his father was, then John,
Og-mund's son, was hallowed bishop, first to the see of Holar. He
was there a winter less than half sixty [54]. But twelve winters
after Gizor had been made bishop, in all six-and-thirty winters,
then Thor-lac was hallowed bishop. Gizor had him hallowed to the see
of Scal-holt in his own lifetime. Thor-lac was there two winters more
than thirty. But bishop Gizor died thirty nights later in Scal-holt
on the third day of the week [the fifth] of the kalends of June.

12. In the same year departed pope Paschalis the Second, earlier than
bishop Gizor, and Baldwin king of Jerusalem, and Arnald patriarch in
Jerusalem, and Philip king of the Swedes; and later the same summer
Alexius king of the Greeks. He had then been thirty-eight winters
established on the throne of Mickle-garth [Constantinople], and two
winters later was the change of cycle [lunar cycle]. Ey-stan and
Sig-urd had then been seventeen winters kings in Norway after their
father Magnus, son of Olaf, the son of Harold. It was 120 winters
after the fall of An-laf Tryggvason, and 250 after the slaughter
of Ead-mund king of the English, and 516 winters after the passing
away of Gregorius the pope, that brought Christendom into England,
according as it is counted, and he died in the second year of the
kingdom of Phocas the kayser, 604 years after the birth of Christ by
the general count. That maketh altogether 1120 years.

Here endeth this Book.


[Epilogue of Dedication.]

This is the kindred of the bishops of the Icelanders and their
genealogy.

Cetil-beorn, the settler that settled south at Moss-fell the Upper,
was father of Tait, father of Gizor the White, father of Is-laf,
who was the first bishop in Scal-holt, the father of bishop Gizor.

Hrol-laug, the settler that settled east in Side at Broad-bowster,
was father of Ozur, father of Thor-dis, mother of Hall o' Side,
father of Egil, father of Thor-gerd, mother of John, who was the
first bishop of Holar.

And the settler that settled west in Broad-frith in Hwam was the
mother of Thor-stan the Red, father of An-laf Feilan, father of
Thord Gelle, father of Thor-hild Riupa, mother of Thord Horse-head,
father of Carls-efne, father of Snorre, father of Hall-frith, mother
of Thor-lac, that is now bishop of Scal-holt next to Gizor.

Helge the Lean, the settler that settled north in Ey-frith in
Christ-ness, was the father of Helga, mother of Einar, father of
Ey-wolf Walgerdsson, father of God-mund, father of Ey-wolf, father of
Thor-stan, father of Ketil, that is now bishop of Holar next to John.


[Author's Pedigree and Name.]

These are the names of the line of the fore-bears of the Ynglings
and the Broad-frith-men:--

I. Yngwe, king of the Turks. II. Niord, king of the
Swees [Swedes]. III. Frey. IV. Fiolne, he that died at
Frith-Frode's. V. Swegde. VI. Wan-land. VII. Wis-bur. VIII.
Dom-ald. IX. Dom-here. X. Dyggwe. XI. Day. XII. Alrec
[Eal-ric]. XIII. Agne. XIV. Yngwe. XV. Ior-und
[Eor-wend]. XVI. Aun the Old. XVII. Egil
Wendil-crow. XVIII. Ott-ar [Oht-here]. XIX. Ath-isl [Ead-gils] at
Upsal. XX. Ey-stan. XXI. Yng-war [Yngw-here]. XXII. Braut-Onund
[Ean-wend the Roadmaker]. XXIII. Ingi-ald the
Ill-rede. XXIV. An-laf Tree-feller. XXV. Half-dan
White-leg, king of Up-land-men. XXVI. God-rod
[Godo-frith]. XXVII. An-laf. XXVIII. Helge. XXIX. Ingi-ald,
daughter's son of Sig-rod, son of Ragnar Lod-broc. XXX. Oleif the
White. XXXI. Thor-stan the Red. XXXII. Oleif Feilan, who first of
them settled in Iceland. XXXIII. Thord Gelle. XXXIV. Ey-wolf,
who was baptized in his old age when Christendom came to
Iceland. XXXV. Thor-kell. XXXVI. Gelle, father of these: Thor-kell,
father of Brand, and of Thor-gils my father: but my name is Are.











CHAPTER 2

§ 2. PRIMITIVE LAWS AND CUSTOMS OF THE DAYS OF THE SETTLEMENT.


Scattered up and down the Icelandic Family Histories and the Kings'
Lives are a number of curious and precious statements relating
to primitive law and custom. These are evidently not integral
parts of the documents in which they occur, but pieces taken from
some other work and inserted by the scribes or editors as notes
or glosses explanatory of some point or passage of the text in
hand. They bear nearly all one stamp, are couched in a peculiar
and consistent phraseology, and compare in all points with the
similar notices by Are in his Landnama-book and Libellus. It is but
reasonable to ascribe them to Are; and, indeed, it is not likely
that there were in Iceland two persons of like interest in the past
and gifts to record the knowledge they gleaned, both alike using the
same peculiar technical terms. But though we are safe in supposing
these morsels to be fragments of some work of Are, what work was
it? Were it not that Liber was dedicated to two bishops, and, being
presumably written in Latin, would afford no good place for such
matter, we might ascribe them to this last work. Taking all things
into consideration, we may more securely suppose that in some work
possibly treating of Icelandic Legal Antiquities, Are had gathered
many of those valuable remains of Teutonic heathendom in Norway,
the Western Isles, and Iceland itself. His interest in the origin of
the Icelandic polity, his legal knowledge and precision of statement,
and the fact that the subject was one that was so consonant to his
talents, would easily persuade us that a work of this kind--a mere
'scroll' of a few sheets maybe--may have once existed. However this
be, it will not be seriously questioned that internal evidence, as
well as external, points to Are and his age as the fountain-head of
all our knowledge of old Northern law and custom, and in ascribing to
him the authorship of the mass of matter contained in this section,
we rest on ground that will not be easily shaken.

We have separated those notices of early Norwegian laws and traditional
customs which go back to and refer to times older than the Wicking-tide
(9th and 10th centuries), as they properly belong to older Scandinavian
history, but kept all those which have any connection with men or
matters of the days of the migration to and colonization of the
British Isles and Iceland.

They are for convenience of reference roughly classed under a few
heads as follows:--



    I. Temple Law and Ritual.
    II. Oaths of Procedure.
    III. Legal Ceremonials.
    IV. Holm-gang, or Wager of Battle.
    V. Criminal Law.
    VI. Family Law.
    VII. Wicking Law.
    VIII. Merchant Law.
    IX. Constitutional History.
    X. Early Christian Custom.



The source from which each is taken is duly referred to at the foot
of each extract.

The majority of these glosses come from the minor Sagas; as in
the later and greater Sagas such matter has been thoroughly and
artistically worked into the mass of narrative or dialogue, so
that even where it seems to show, it cannot be now severed from the
context. Of course the few fragments now remaining and here printed,
are but the mere specimens of a mass of custom and law now entirely
lost and forgotten, but they suffice to show its primitive type. They
are also the more valuable, inasmuch as they are not affected by
subsequent legal tradition, which must always be reckoned with, when
lawyers deal with archaic law. Hence we have given another section
to the bits of early law preserved in Grágas, etc.

The translation is as close as may be, the importance of preserving
the exact wording being great. There are a few notes subjoined on
points of interest, but we have not attempted here to deal with the
vast variety of anthropologic and legal questions which these little
'anecdota' raise. English historians and archaeologists will find
them worthy of study.

The pieces from the Kings' Lives are taken from Kringla; as for
those of Grágas, Cd. is = Cd. Reg., S = Cod. Stad. The Trygða-mál
(II) is the longest and best specimen of alliterative 'carmina,' as
it were, that have come to us. Even in the Eddic songs we find traces
of such, viz. the curse in the Helgi Lay, l. 261 ff., is partly and
imperfectly made up of such a carmen, alliterative but not regular
Epic verse. These Trygða-mál have come to us in partial variation
in Greg. Cod. Reg., in Heiðar-viga Saga, ed. Holm. (H), and lastly,
an inferior text in Grette Saga (G). A few lines have been picked
out from these latter marked in brackets.

The famed Law fragments inserted into Hawk's-book, IV. 13, and here
entered, are in fact three different bits of ancient law. The first bit
(III) can have no relation to Iceland,--ships of war never crossed the
ocean,--but holds good for the Scandinavian continent. The Ring-oath
section we have placed in I; and lastly, the list on the division
into Quarters in IX.

We have omitted all pieces contained (and already printed) in
Landnama-book and in Libellus.

The Temple-section in Eyrbyggja is supplemented by the (though
inferior) text in Kialnesinga Saga of Watzhyrna; both editors (of
Eyrb. and of Kialnesinga) must have drawn from the same original.

We have in a few instances restored in brackets the lost heathen
formula.

A few sections of doubtful authority from Gunnlaug Saga and Grette
Saga we have given in brackets.







SECTION I

I. Temple Law and Ritual.

Freyr reiste at Uppsaolom hof miket, oc sette þar haofoð-stað sínn;
lagðe þar til allar scylder sínar, laond oc lausan eyre--þá hófsc
Uppsala-auðr, oc hefer haldesc æ síðan.--Yngl. Saga, ch. 12.

1. Þat vas forn siðr, þá es blót scylde vesa, at aller boendr scyldo5
þar coma sem hof vas, oc flytja þannog faong sín þau es þeir scyldo
hafa meðan veizlan stóð. At veizlo þeirre scyldo aller menn aol eiga;
þar vas oc drepenn allz-conar smale oc svá hross.

2. En blóð þat allt es þar com af, þá vas callat hlaut-blóð [1174],
oc hlaut-bollar þat es blóð þat stóð í, oc hlaut-teinar. Þat vas
svá10 goert sem stoeclar: með því (blóðe) scylde rióða stallana aollo
saman, oc svá vegge hofsens útan oc innan; oc svá stoeccva á mennena;
en sláttr scylde sióða til mann-fagnaðar.

3. Eldar scyldo vesa á miðjo golfe í hofeno, oc þar catlar yfer,
oc scylde full um eld bera.15

4. En sá es goerðe veizlona, oc haofðinge vas, þá scylde hann signa
fullet oc allan blót-matenn.

5. Scylde fyrst Oðens-full, scylde þat drecca til sigrs oc ríkes
conunge sínom: en síðan Niarðar-full, oc Freys-full, tils árs oc
friðar.20

6. Þá vas maorgom maonnom títt at drecca þar næst Braga-full.

7. Menn drucco oc full frænda sínna, þeirra es heygðer [1175] haofðo
veret: oc vóro þat minne caolloð.--Kings' Lives, Haconar Saga.

Þann gaolt es mestan fecc, scylde hann (conungr) gefa Frey: caolloðo
þeir hann svá helgan, at yfer hans burst scylde sverja um aoll
stór-maól, oc scylde þeim gelte blóta at sónar-blóte Ióla-aftan:5
scylde leiða sónar-gaoltenn í haoll fyrer conong, laogðo menn þá
hendr yfer burst hans, oc strengja heit.--Heidrec's Saga.

1. Vóro dyrr á hlið-veggenom [1176] oc nær aoðrom endanom: þar
fyr innan stóðo aondoges-súlornar, oc vóro þar í naglar, þeir héto
regin-naglar.10

2. Þar fyr innan vas frið-staðr mikell.

3. Innar af hofeno vas hús í þá líking sem nú es saong-hús í kirkjom;
oc stóð þar stalle á miðjo golfeno sem altare; oc lá þar á hringr
einn mót-lauss, tví-eyringr; oc scylde þar at sverja eiða alla. Þann
hring scylde hof-goðe hafa á hende ser til allra mann-funda.15

4. Á stallanom scylde oc standa hlaut-bolle; oc þar í hlaut-teinn
[1177] sem stoccull være oc scylde þar stoeccva með or bollanom blóðe
því es hlaut-blóð [1178] vas callat: þat vas þess-conar blóð es soefð
vóro þau kyckvende es goðonom vas fórnat.20

5. [Um-hverfis stallann vas goðonom skipat í af-húseno.] [1179]

6. Til hofsens scyldo aller menn tolla gialda, oc vesa scylder hof-goða
til allra ferða, sem nú ero þing-menn haofðingjom.

7. En Goðe scylde hofe upp halda af sialfs síns costnaðe, svá at eige
hroernaðe; oc hafa inne blót-veizlor.

8. En maonnom es þeir blótoðo (r. bléto) scylde steypa ofan í5 fen
pat es úte vas hiá duronom. Þat caolloðo þeir Blót-keldo.

9. Þar á [on the stall] scylde vesa eldr sá es aldrege scylde
sloccna.--Nos. 1-7 from Eyrb. Saga; 8-9 from Kialn. Saga.

1. Baugr tví-eyringr eða meire scylde liggja í hverjo haofoð-hofe á
stalla: þann baug scylde hverr Goðe hafa á hende ser til10 laog-þinga
allra þeirra es hann scylde sialfr heyja; oc rióða hann þar áðr í
roðro blót-nautz [1180] þess es hann blótaðe þar sialfr.

2. Hverr sá maðr, es þar þurfte laog-scil af hende at leysa at
dóme, scylde áðr eið vinna at þeim bauge, oc nefna ser vátta tvá eða
fleire. 'Nefne-ec [N. N. and M. M.] í þat vætte' scylde hann15 segja,
'at ec vinn eið at bauge, laog-eið. Hialpe mer svá Freyr oc Niaorðr,
oc enn Almáttce Óss [1181], sem ec mon svá saoc þessa soekja,--eða
verja, eða vætte [1182], eða cviðo; eða dóma [1183] doema,--sem ec
veit réttazt, oc sannazt, oc hoelzt at laogom; oc aoll laog-mælt
[1184] scil af hende leysa þau es under mec coma, meðan ec em á þesso
þinge.'--Hawk's-bóc.20 Landn. IV. 13, p. 187.

Sá maðr es hofs-eið scylde vinna, tóc silfr-baug í haond ser, þann
es roðenn vas í nautz blóðe, þess es til blóta være haft, oc scylde
eige minna standa an þriá aura. Þá kvað Glúmr svá at orðe, etc.--See
below, Glúma.


The Oath.

Vas á cveðit nær eiðrenn scylde unnenn vesa um haustet at5 fimm vicom
... eða hann vinne eiða í þremr hofom í Eyja-firðe, oc eið-fall ef
þá koemr eige framm.

(Þá kvað Glúmr svá at orðe): 'Ec nefne Asgrím í vætte, annan Gizor
í þat vætte, at ec vinn hofs-eið at bauge, oc sege-ec þat Æse,
at ec vasc-at þar, oc ec vác-at þar, oc rauðc-at þar odd oc10 egg,
es Þórvaldr Crókr feck bana.'--Glúma, ch. 25.





SECTION I

I.

Temple Treasury. Frey raised a great temple at Upsala [Up-halls]
and set there his head-stead or capital, and endowed it with all his
revenues or dues, land and moveables. That was the beginning of the
Treasury of Upsala, which hath continued ever since.

1. It was the old way, when a sacrifice was to be, that all the
franklins should come to the place where the temple was, and carry
thither the victuals that they wished to have as long as the banquet
or feast lasted. All were to have a drinking together, and there were
also slaughtered all kind of cattle and also horses.

2. And all the blood that came thereof was then called sortilege-blood,
and sortilege-bowls those wherein the blood stood, and sortilege-twigs
that were made like a sprinkler. With this [blood] were all the altars
to be sprinkled withal, and also the walls of the temple without and
within, and also sprinkled on the people, but the meat was seethed
for the entertainment of the people.

3. There had to be fires in the midst of the floor of the temple,
and kettles over them, and the toasts were carried across the fire.

4. And he that made the feast or was chief had to make a sign or sain
over the toast and the sacrificial meat.

5. First must come Wodin's toast: that was drunk to victory and power
of the king; and then Niard's or Nerth's toast; and Frey's toast for
good seasons and peace.

6. It was many man's wont to drink Brage's toast after that.

7. Men also would drink a toast to their kinsmen that had been laid
in their barrows, and that was called the memory-toast.

Vows on the sacrificial boar. The biggest boar they could get the
king would give to Frey, and they called him so holy that over his
bristles they would swear in all their great cases, and they would
sacrifice this boar at the Sona-sacrifice, on the even of Yule. They
would lead the Sona-boar into the hall before the king, and laying
their hands over his bristles they made their vows.--Heidrec's Saga.

1. There were doors in the side walls nearer the one end, and inside
over against these stood the porch-pillars, and there were nails in
them. They were called the nails of the powers [holy nails].

2. And within it was a great sanctuary.

3. At the upper end, jutting out from the temple, was a house in the
fashion of the choir in the churches now, and there stood a stall
[table] in the middle of the floor, like an altar, and thereon lay
a ring without a join, of two-ounce weight, upon which all oaths had
to be sworn. This ring the temple-gode or priest had to have on his
hand at all assemblies.

4. On the stall moreover the sortilege or lot-bowl used to stand, and
in it the sortilege or lot-twigs, as it were a sprinkler, to sprinkle
withal the blood out of the bowl which was called lot-[blood]. It was
the blood of the living things that were pithed which were offered
to the gods.

5. [Around the table the gods were set up in the off-house [annex].]

6. All men used to pay toll to the temple, and were bound to all
summons of the temple-gode, as thing-men are now to their chiefs.

7. But the gode or priest was bound to keep up the temple at his own
cost, so that it did not fall into ruin, and give the sacrificial
feasts inside it.

8. But the men whom they would sacrifice were cast down into a
pool that was outside hard by the doors. They called it the Well
of Sacrifice.

9. Thereupon [on the altar] there had to be a fire that was never to
be quenched.--Nos. 1-7 from Eyrb.; 8-9 from Kialn. Saga, Watzhyrna.

1. A Ring of two-ounce weight or more must lie on the altar in every
head-temple. This ring every gode or priest must carry in his hand to
any law-moot that he himself was to preside over, and he must first
redden it in the blood of the sacrificial beast which he sacrificed
there himself.

2. Every man that needed to perform any law-business at the court,
must first take an oath on that ring, and name two witnesses or more--

'I name N. N. and M. M. witnesses herein [he must say], that I take
an oath on the ring, a lawful oath. So help me Frey and Nerth, and
the Almighty Anse [Thunder], as I do, according as the case may be,
pursue this suit, or defend [this suit], or bear witness, or give
verdict, or doom a doom [sentence], as I know it to be most righteous
and most true and most according to law, and perform all lawful acts
that come or fall upon me while I am on this moot.'--Landn.

The man that would take a temple-oath took a silver ring in his hand
that was reddened with the beasts' blood that were made a sacrifice,
and which was not of less weight than three ounces.--Gluma.

Temple-oath. The time was fixed when the oath should be taken in the
harvest at the five weeks [i.e. when five weeks of the summer were
left, c. Sept. 10] ..., and he must take the oath at three temples in
Ey-frith, and the oath was to be null, or there should be oath-fall
if it were not performed then.--Gluma.

Clearing-oath. Then Glum spake in these words: 'I name As-grim to
witness, and the second Gizor to witness this; and I take a temple-oath
on the ring, and I say this to the Anse, that I was not there, and
I did not fight there, and I did not redden point or edge there when
Thor-wald Croke gat his death or bane.'--Gluma.





SECTION II

II. Oaths of Procedure.

Þá es manne frelse gefet at fullo es hann es í laog leiddr. Hann scal
í laog leiða Goðe sá es hann es í þinge með. Hann scal taca cross
[baug] í haond ser, oc nemna vátta:

'Í þat vætte, at ec vinn [1185] eið at crosse, [at bauge] laog-eið,
oc15 sege-ec þat Goðe [Æse] at hann mon halda laogom sem sá es
vel heldr, oc hann vill þá vesa í laogom með aoðrom maonnom:
þeim [1186] sé Goð gramt [goð graom] es því níter, nema fé síno
boéte.'--Grág. Cod. Reg.

Fimtar-dóms-eiðr: Hann scal taca bóc í haond ser, meire an20 hals-bóc,
oc nemna ser vátta [N. N. and M. M.] 'í þat vætte, at ec vinn eið at
bóc, Fimtar-dóms-eið: Hialpe mer svá Goð í þvísa lióse oc aoðro,' scal
hann qveða; 'sem ec man svá soekja saoc mína á hendr hónom (oc nefna
hann) sem ec hygg sannaz oc rettaz oc hellz at laogom; oc ec hygg hann
sannan [ó-sannan] at saoc þeirre es ec hefe á hende hónom: oc ec hefca
fé boðet í dóm5 þenna til liðs mer um saoc þessa: oc ec monca bióða:
hefca-ec fundet, oc monca-ec finna hvárke til laga né til ólaga.'

Sannaðar-menn ... þeir scolo taca bóc í haond ser meire an hals-bóc, oc
nefna ser vátta: 'í þat vætte, at ec vinn eið at bóc, Fimtar-dóms-eið:
Hialpe svá mer Goð (scal hann queða) í þvísa lióse oc10 aoðro, sem ec
hygg þat, at N. N. myne svá soekja saoc sína á hendr M. M. sem hann
hyggr sannaz oc rettaz oc hellz at laogom: oc hann hyggr hann sannan
[ó-sannan] at saoc þeirre (oc queða á saocena es hann hefer á hende
hónom): oc hefer-at hann fé boðet í dóm þenna til liðs ser um saoc
þessa: oc mon-at hann bióða: oc15 hefer-at hann fundet, oc mon-at
hann finna, hvárke til laga né ólaga.'--Grág. Þing sk. þ.

1. 'Aller vito at-burðe um mis-sætte þeirra N. N. oc M. M.; en nu
ero viner þeirra við comner, oc vilja þá sætta.'

2. 'Nú selr N. N., M. M. grið til sáttar-stefno þeirrar, es þeir20
hafa á cveðet, firer sec oc sínn erfingja, oc alla þá menn es hann
á griðom fyrer at halda [1187]: en M. M. tecr grið af M. M. ser til
handa oc sínom erfingjom, oc aollom þeim maonnom es hann þarf grið
til handa at taca.'

3. 'En nú es Goð sialfr þeirra fyrstr, es baztr es, oc aller Helger
menn, oc allr Heilagr dómr; Páve at Róme, oc Patriarche, conongr várr
oc byscopar órer, oc bóc-lærðer menn aller; oc allt cristet folc.'

4. 'Ec nefne tolf menn í grið þesse á miðlom þeirra N. N. oc5 M. M. es
nú standa tveim-megin at maólom'--(oc scal nefna þá tolf menn).

5. Síðan scal sá maðr, es fyrer griðom mæler, nefna vátta, tvá eða
fleire, 'at því vætte, at þesse grið, es nú ero nefnd, scolo vesa full
oc faost, allra manna á miðle þeirra es her coma í mann-saomnoð10
þenna, oc meðan menn ero her lengst á mann-funde þessom; oc hverr
maðr coemr heim til síns heima. Oc þótt oftarr verðe funder lagðer
til mála þeirra, þá scolo þó grið halda [1188], til þess es svá es
maólom þeirra locet, sem þau mego bazt lúcasc.'

6. 'Nú heldr iaorð griðom upp: en himinn varðar fyr ofan: en15 haf
et Rauða fyr útan, es liggr um laond aoll þau es ver haofom tíðende
af. En á miðle þessa ende-marca, es nú hefe-ec her talt fyrer maonnom,
þrífesc sá maðr hverge es þesse grið rýfr, es ec hefe her nefnd;
oc binde hann ser svá haofga byrðe at hann comesc aldrege undan,
en þat es--20


    Goð-Dróttens [goða] greme oc grið-bítz namn.


En þeir menn aller hafe Goðs misc-unn [goða hylle], oc griðom halda
vel, oc allra heilagra árnaðar-orð til allrar þurftar sínnar við
Almátcan Goð!


    Sé Goð hollr [goð holl] þeim's heldr griðom,
    en gramr [graom] þeim's grið rýfr:
    hollr [holl] þeim's heldr.5
    Hafet heiler grið selsc!'


7. Þat ero forn laog á lande óro, ef maðr verðr secr um griða-rof,
at þeir menn tolf es í grið ero nefnder, eigo at taca rétt or fé hans,
átta aura ens fimta-tegar.

8. En þat ero laog í Norege oc (á) alla Dansca Tungo, ef maðr10
þyrmer eige griðom, at sá maðr es út-lagr fyr ende-langan Noreg framm,
oc ferr bæðe laondom sínom oc lausa-fé; oc scal aldregi í land coma
síðan.--Griða-mál (Grág. Cod. Reg.).


1. Sacar vóro á mille þeirra N. N. oc M. M.: en nú ero þær settar oc
fé boettar:15


    Sem metendr maóto;
    oc teljendr taolðo:
    oc dómr doemðe:
    oc þiggjendr þaógo oc þaðan baóro
    með fé fullo oc framm comnom eyre,20
    þeim í haond selt es hafa scyllde.


2. It scolot vesa menn:


    Sátter oc sam-værer
    at aolðre oc at áte,
    á þinge oc á þióð-stefno,
    at circna sócn oc í conongs húse,5


oc hver-vetna þess es manna-funder verða, þá scolot it svá sam-sátter,
sem aldregi hoefesc þetta yccar á meðal.

3. It scolot


    Deila kníf oc koet-stycce,
    oc alla hlute yccar í miðle
    sem frændr en eige sem fiándr.10


4. Ef sacar goerasc síðan á miðle þeirra, annat an þat es vel es:


    Þær [1189] scal fé boeta, en eige flein rióða.



5. En sá yccarr es


    gengr á goervar sátter,
    eða vegr á veittar trygðer.


Þá scal hann


    svá víða vargr vræcr oc vrecenn, sem menn15
                víðazt varga vreca.
    cristner menn circjor soekja,
    heiðner menn hof blóta,
    elldr upp brennr [1190], iaorð groer,
    maogr móðor callar; oc móðer maog foeðer,20
    allder elda cynda:
    scip scríðr, scilder blícja [1191],
    sól scínn, snæ leggr,
    Fiðr scríðr, fura vex,
    valr flýgr vár-langan dag;5
    stendr hónom byrr beinn und báða vænge:
    himinn hverfr, heimr es bygðr,
    vindr þýtr, vaotn til sævar falla,
    carlar corne sá.


6. Hann scal firrasc


    circjor oc Cristna menn,10
    Goðs hús [goða hof] oc guma [1192],
    heim hvern nema Helvíte.


7. Nú haldet it báðer á bóc einne, enda liggr nú fé á bóc es
N. N. boeter fyrer sec oc sínn erfingja--


    alenn oc óborenn,15
    getenn oc ógetenn,
    nefndan oc ónefndan:


8. N. N. tecr trygðer, en M. M. veiter--


    mætar trygðer oc megen-trygðer [1193],
    Ævin-trygðer, þær es æ scolo haldasc20
    meðan mold es oc menn lifa.


9. Nu ero þeir N. N. oc M. M.       sátter oc sam-mála, hvarge er
[1194] þeir hittasc


    á lande eða lege,
    á scipe eða á scíðe,
    í hafe eða á hestz-bace:
    árar miðla eða aust-scoto,5
    þofto eða þiljo, ef þarfar goervasc.


Iam-sátter hvárr við annan, sem faðer við son eða sonr við faoðor í
sam-faorom aollom. [1195] Nú leggja þeir hendr sínar saman, N. N. oc
M. M. Haldet vel trygðer, at vilja Cristz oc allra manna þeirra es
nú heyrðo trygða-mól [H: haofom nú lófa-tac at trygða-maólom,10 oc
haoldom vel tr. at v. Cr. oc at vitne allra m....].


    Hafe sá hylle Goðs [goða], es heldr trygðer
    en sá greme Goðs [1196] [greme goða], es rýfr réttar trygðer:
    en hylle sá's helldr.
    Hafet heiler sæzc.15
    En ver sém váttar es við erom stadder. [H: en Goð sé við alla
    sáttr.]



Trygða-mál Grág. (Cd. Reg. = Cd.; Heiðarvíga Saga = H; Grettes Saga
= G.)






SECTION II

II.

Oath of surety [Christianised after 1001]. A man is given his freedom
freely when he is led into the law. The priest or gode of whose moot
he is must lead him into the law. He must take the cross [earlier,
the ring] in his hand and name witnesses to witness thereto--

'That I take an oath on the cross [ring], a lawful oath, and I say
this to God [the Anse] that he [this freedman] will keep the laws as he
that keepeth them well, and that he wisheth to be in the law with other
men. May God [the gods] be wrath with them that deny this--unless....'

The Fifth-Court-oath in appeals [founded after 1003, before 1011]. He
shall take a book in his hand, bigger than a neck-book or amulet-book,
and name witnesses to himself: That 'I take the oath on the book,
a Fifth-Court-oath: So help me God in this light and the other,
as I shall set my suit or case up against him (and name him), as I
believe it to be most true and most right and most fast to the law,
and as I believe him to be truly guilty in this suit that I have set
up against him. And I have not offered money in this court to get me
help in this suit, and I will offer none. And I have not paid money
nor will I pay any whether it be for lawful or unlawful ends.'

The oath of the two Sootheners named by the principal in the Fifth
Doom. They shall take a book in their hands, bigger than a neck-book
or amulet-book, and name witnesses to themselves: 'To witness thereto,
that I take an oath on the book, a Fifth-Court-oath, etc. ..., as
I believe that N. N. will so pursue his suit against M. M. as he
believeth it to be most true, etc.... And as he believed him to be
truly guilty, etc.... And he hath not offered money, etc.... And he
hath not paid money, etc.'

The form of peace-making. 1. 'All know what hath happened regarding
or how it standeth concerning of the feud or misunderstanding between
N. N. and M. M., but now their friends are come between them and are
wishing to set them at one.'

2. 'Now N. N. doth hansel M. M. peace or safe conduct to the place of
reconciliation which hath been named, on the part of himself and his
heirs, and all those men on whose behalf he ought to hansel peace. And
M. M. accepteth peace from N. N. on his own behalf and his heirs,
and all those men on whose behalf he ought to accept peace.'

3. 'And now is God himself the first of them as he is the best, and
all his saints, and all halidoms, the pope at Rome, and the patriarch,
our king, and our bishops, and all clerks [lit. book-learned men],
and all Christian people.'

4. 'I name twelve men for this peace between them, N. N. and M. M.,
that now stand on both sides of the case,' and with that he nameth
twelve men.

5. Then shall the man that speaketh the peace name two witnesses or
more to witness to this, 'that this peace that is now named shall be
full and fast between all men that are here come to this meeting or
summoning of men, and as long as men stay here at this meeting of
men, and till every man be come hence to his home. And if there be
any further meeting fixed in their case, this peace shall hold until
this matter or case be so ended as may best be.'

6. 'Now may Earth uphold the peace, and Heaven be its boundary from
above, and from without the Red Sea that runneth round about all lands
that we know of; and within these end-marks or limits that I have now
reckoned up before men, may that man never thrive that breaks this
peace which I have named here, and may he bind so heavy a burden on
him that he shall never get rid of! And that is--


    The wrath of the Lord God [the gods] and the name of truce-breaker.


But all these men may they have God's mercy that [MS.: and] hold well
the peace, and all the saints' intercession in all their needs with
Almighty God!


    God [the gods] be gracious to them that keep this peace,
    But wrathful with them that break this peace!
    Gracious to them that keep it.
    Hail, ye that have handselled peace to each other!'


7. That was the old or heathen law in our land, if a man was outlawed
for breach of truce or peace, that those twelve men that were named in
the peace ought to take the right out of his money, forty-eight ounces.

8. But this is law in Norway and over the Danish tongue, if a man
observe not his peace or truce, that the man be outlawed throughout
Norway, and forfeit both his lands and his moveables, and he shall
never come back into the land again.


Formula of peace-making. 1. There was feud between N. N. and M. M.,
but now they are set at one and many:


    As the meter meted,
    And the teller told,
    And the dooms-man deemed,
    And the givers gave,
    And the receivers received
    And carried it away
    With full fee and paid ounce,
    Handselled to them that ought to have it.



2. Ye two shall be made men--


    At one and in agreement,
    At feast and food,
    At moot and meeting of the people,
    At church-soken and in the king's house;


[Originally, In the temple-soken and in the chief's house]

And wheresoever men meet,

Ye shall be so reconciled together as that it shall hold for ever
between you.

3. Ye two shall


    Share knife and carven steak,
    And all your things between you,
    As friends and not as foes.



4. If case of quarrel or feud arise between you other than is well,
It shall be booted or paid for with money and not by reddening
the dart or arrow.


5. And he of you twain that shall go against the settlement or
atonement made,


    Or break the bidden troth,
    He shall be wolf-hunted and to be hunted,
    As far as men hunt wolves:
    Christian men seek churches;
    Heathen men sacrifice in temples;
    Fire burneth; earth groweth;
    Son calleth mother, and mother beareth son;
    Folk kindle fire;
    Ship saileth; shields glint;
    Sun shineth; snow lieth;
    The Fin skateth; the fir groweth;
    The hawk flieth the long spring day,
    With a fair wind behind him on wings outspread;
    Heaven turneth; earth is dwelt on;
    Wind bloweth; waters fall to the sea;
    Churl soweth corn.



6. He shall be outcast


    From Church and Christian men;
    From God's house [temples of the gods] and from men;
    From every world save hell-woe or torment.


7. Now do ye two both hold one book [orig. ring], and place the money
on the book that N. N. payeth for himself and his heirs,


    Born and unborn,
    Begotten and unbegotten,
    Named and unnamed,


8. N. N. taketh troth or truce and M. M. giveth it:


    Dear troth and strong troth.
    An everlasting peace that shall hold for ever,
    While the world is and men live.


9. Now are N. N. and M. M. At peace or atonement and accord Wherever
they meet,


    On land or water,
    On ship or snow-skate,
    On sea or on horseback;
    To share oar and bilge-scoop,
    Bench and bulwark if need be;
    Even set with each other,
    As father with son or son with father,
    In all dealings together.



Now they lay their hands together, N. N. and M. M. Hold well these
troths, by the will of Christ and of all those men that have now
heard this form of peace:


    May he have God's grace that holdeth these troths or truce,
    And he his wrath that breaketh these troths or truce,
    And he have grace that holdeth them!
    Hail, ye that are set at one!
    And we that are set as witnesses thereto.--Cod. Reg.







SECTION III

III. Legal Ceremonials.

Þat vas upp-haf enna heiðno laga, at menn scyldo eige hafa20
haofoð-scip í haf; en ef þeir hefðe, þá scylde þeir af taca haofoð,
áðr þeir kócme í lannz-sýn, oc sigla eige at lande með gapondom [1197]
haofðom eðr gínondom triónom, svá at land-vætter fælðesc við.--Landn.:
Hawk's-bóc, IV. 13. 2, p. 187.

Ganga þeir nú út í Eyrar-hváls-odda, oc rísta þar upp or iaorðo
iarðar-men, svá at báðer endar vóro faster í iaorðo, oc setto þar
under mála-spiót þat er maðr mátte taca hende sínne til geir-nagla,5
þeir scyldo þar fiórer under ganga, Þórgrímr, Þórkell, Gísle oc
Vésteinn. Oc nú vekja þeir sér blóð, oc láta renna saman dreyra sínn
í þeirre moldo es upp vas scoren undan iarðar-meneno, oc hroera saman
allt, moldena oc blóðet. En síðan féllo þeir aller á kné oc sverja
þann eið, at hverr scal annars hefna sem bróðor10 síns: oc nefna aoll
goðen í vitne; oc er þeir tócoz í hendr aller, þá mælte...--Gisl. Saga.

B. kvasc eige mundo fé-boetr taca, oc þvi at eins sættasc at Iaokull
gange under þriú iarðar-men, sem þar vas siðr efter stórar afgerðer,
oc sýna svá lítilæte við mic ... et fyrsta iarðar-men tóc15 í aoxl;
annat í bróc-linda; þriðja í mitt lær. Þá gecc Þórsteinn under
et fyrsta. B. mælte þá: 'Svín-beygða-ec nú þann sem oeztr vas af
Vatz-doelom.'--Vatzd. Saga, ch. 33.

Þat vas þá scírsla í þat mund, at ganga scylde under iarðar-men,
þat er torfa var risten or velle: scyldo endarner torfonnar vesa20
faster í vellenom: en sá maðr er scírslona scylde framm flytja,
scylde þar ganga under ... þá varð sá scírr es under iarðar-menet
gecc ef torfan fell eige á hann.--Laxd. Saga, ch. 18.

Þórsteinn Svorfr fór nú miðlum fiallz oc fiaoro, oc lagðe under sik
allan dalenn aoðrom-megen; er [1198] [en] hann ferr til fiallz oc gerer
þar kenne-marc sem hann com framazt, oc braut þar í sundr camb sínn,
oc castaðe niðr cambs-brotonom, oc lætr efter silfr, halfa maorc í
hverjom stað, oc es sá rime kallaðr at Cambe; oc nefner5 Þórsteinn
sér vátta, oc feller hann með því dalenn ser til vistar, oc gaf af
ser nafn, oc callaðe Svarfaðar-dal.--Svarfd. Saga (beginning).

Ec skal stefna hónom af goðorðeno.... Hoscullr mælte: 'Ver scolom rióða
oss í goða blóte [1199] at fornom sið,'--oc hió hrút einn, oc10 callaðe
ser goðorð Arnsteins, oc rauð hendrnar í blóðe hrútzens.--Liosv. Saga,
§ 1.

Þat var þeirra átrúnaðr, ef málit genge mis-iamt [or úiamt] [1200]
þá es optarr væri reynt, at þess mannz ráð mynde saman ganga,
ef mál-vaondrenn þyrre, en þróazc, ef hann visse til mikilleiks:
gecc15 nú málet saman, oc var þrimr sinnum reynt.--Corm. Saga, ch. 1.





SECTION III

III.

This was the beginning of the heathen laws, that men must not keep a
ship at sea with a figure-head on; but if they have, then they must
take off the head before they come in sight of land, and not sail to
land with gaping heads and yawning jaws to frighten the spirits or
wights of the country.

Sworn brotherhood. Now they walked out to Eyre-knoll-edge, and raised
up or cut out of the earth an earth-necklace, so that both ends [of the
strip of turf] were fast to the earth, and under it they put a graven
spear, such that a man might touch the spear-nail or blade-rivet with
his hand. They four--N, M, O, P--were to go under it. And now they
let themselves blood, and let their gore run together into the mould
that was laid bare under the earth-necklace, and stirred altogether,
the mould and the blood. And then they all fell on their knees and
swore an oath, that every one should avenge the other like his own
brother, and named all the gods to witness, and as they grasped each
other's hands...--Gisl. Saga.

Subjugation. B. said that he would not take money-boot, nor be set
at one with I. unless he went under the earth-necklace [or strip of
turf], as was then the custom after great offences, and so show his
humility towards one. [I. refused, but his brother Th. offered to
do so for him.] The first earth-necklace reached to his shoulder,
the second the breech-belt, the third to mid-thigh. When Th. went
under the first, B. said, 'Now I have hog-backed him that was the
greatest of the Water-dales-men.'--Vatzd. Saga, ch. 33.

It was then an ordeal in those days to go under the earth-necklace,
wherein a strip of turf was cut out of the field, but each end of the
turf must be fast to the field, and the man that did the ordeal had
to go under.... And he was cleared that went under the earth-necklace,
if the turf did not fall upon him.--Laxd. Saga, ch. 18.

Thor-stan Swarfad now went between fell and foreshore, and took unto
himself the whole dale on both sides, and he went to the fell and
there where he reached or came first he made a token-mark and broke
his comb asunder there, and cast down the broken comb, and left
behind him silver, a half-mark in each place. And this strip is
called Comb; and Thor-stan named witness to himself, and he laid
claim to the dale thereby, and gave it his name, and called it
Swarfad-dale.--Svarfd. Saga.

Taking up a gode-hood. I shall summons him on the gode-hood or
priest's-hood.... Haus-coll spake: 'Let us perform a gode-sacrifice
[emend.] after the old or heathen way.' And he slaughtered [lit. hewed]
a ram and claimed the gode-hood of Arn-stan, and reddened his hands
in the blood of the ram.--Liosv. Saga, § 1.

Divination by the Rod or Rhabdomancy. It was their faith, if a
measure went uneven when it was measured more than once [lit. after]
that that man's place should shrink [i. e. fail] together, if the
mete-wand made it shrink, but thrive if it turned out bigger; the
measure kept shrinking, and it was thrice tried.--Corm. Saga, ch. 1.





SECTION IV

IV. Holm-gang, or Wager of  Battle.

Þat vóro holmgaongo-laog, at feldr scal vesa fimm álna í scaut, oc
lyckjor í hornom; scylde þar setja niðr hæla þá, es haofoð vas á aoðrom
enda--þat héto 'tiosnor.' Sá es um bió, scylde ganga at tiosnonom,
svá at sæe himen miðle fóta ser, oc hélde í eyrna-snepla,20 með þeim
for-mála.... Síðan vas frameð blót þat [1201] es callat es tiosno-blót.

1. Þrír reitar scolo um-hverfiss feldenn fetz breiðer: út frá reitom
scolo vesa stengr fiórar [1202],--oc heita þat haoslor. Þat es vaollr
haslaðr es svá es goert.5

2. Maðr scal hafa þriá sciaoldo; en es þeir 'ro farner, þá scal ganga
á feld, þó at áðr hafe af haorfat; þá scal hlífaz með vápnom þaðan frá.

3. Sá scal fyrr hoeggva es á es scorat [1203].

4. Ef annarr verðr sárr, svá at blóð come á feld, es eigi scylt at10
berjasc lengr.

5. Ef maðr stígr aoðrom foete út um haoslor, ferr hann á hæl, en
rennr ef baóðom stígr.

6. Sínn maðr scal halda scilde firer hvaórom þeim es bersc.

7. Sá scal gialda holms-lausn es meirr verðr sárr, þriár mercr15
silfrs í holm-lausn.--Corm. Saga, ch. 10.

Þar var leiddr framm graðungr micell oc gamall: þat vas callat
blót-naut; þat scylde sá hoeggva er sigr hefðe: vas þat stundom eitt
naut, stundom lét sítt hvárr fram leiða sá es á holm geck.--Egil's
Saga, ch. 68.20

En þó vóro þat laog í þann tíma at bióða holm-gaongo sá es van-hluta
þóttesc verða fyr aoðrom.--Gunnl. Saga (A. B).






SECTION IV

IV.

The law of Holm-gang, or Wager of Battle. It was the law of wager
of battle that there should be a cloak of five ells in the skirt
and loops at the corners. They must put down pegs with heads on one
end that were called Tiosnos. He that was performing must go to the
Tiosnos so that the sky could be seen between his legs, holding the
lobes of his ears, with this form of words [form lost], and afterwards
was performed in the sacrifice that is called Tiosno-sacrifice.

1. There must be three lines round about the cloak of a foot breadth;
outside the lines there must be four posts, and they are called hazels,
and the field is hazelled when this is done.

2. A man shall have three shields, and when they are gone then he
shall step on to the skin though he have left it before, and then he
must defend himself with weapon henceforth.

3. He shall strike first that is challenged.

4. If one of them be wounded so that blood come on the cloak, they
shall not fight any longer.

5. If a man step with one foot outside the hazels he is said to flinch
[lit. goes on his heel]; but if he step outside with both feet,
he is said to run.

6. His own man shall hold the shield for each of them that fight.

7. He shall pay holm-ransom that is the more wounded, three marks of
silver as holm-ransom.--Corm. Saga, ch. 10.

The Tiosno-sacrifice. There was led forth a steer, great and old. It
was called the Beast of Sacrifice. He shall strike it that had the
victory. There was sometimes one beast; sometimes each that went on
the holm would lead forth his own.--Egil's Saga, ch. 68.

Now it was still law at that time [after 1001] for him that
thought himself ill-treated by another to challenge him to wager of
battle.--Gunnl. Saga.






SECTION V

V. Criminal Law.

Þat vóro laog í þann tíma, ef maðr drap þræl fyrer manne: at sá
maðr scylde foera heim þræls-giaold, oc hefja ferð sína fyrer ena
þriðjo sól efter víg þrælsens: þat skyldo vesa tolf aurar silfrs. Oc
ef þræls giaold vóro at laogom foerð, þá vas eige sócn til um víg
þrælsens.--Eyrb. Saga, ch. 43.5

Nátt-víg ero morð-víg.--Egil's Saga.

Þat vas þá mælt, at sá være scyldr at hefna, es vápne kipðe or sáre;
en þat vóro caolloð laun-víg en ecke morð, es menn léto vaópn efter
í benenne standa.--Gisl. Saga.


    Ef menn setja menn í út-scer: sá maðr heiter scer-nár.10
    Ef maðr es settr í graof: oc heiter sá graf-nár.
    Ef maðr es foerðr á fiall eða í hella: sá heiter fiall-nár.
    Ef maðr es hengðr: oc heiter sá galg-nár.--Grag. St. § 360.


Níð. En ef noccorer coma eigi, þá scal þeim reisa níð, með
þeim for-mála, at hann scal vesa hvers mannz níðingr, oc vesa15
hverge í samlage góðra manna; hafa goða greme oc grið-níðings
nafn.--Vatzd. Saga, ch. 33.

Þeir tóco súlo eina ... Iaokull scar carls-haofuð á súlo-endanom, oc
reist á rúnar með aollom þeim formála sem fyrr vas sagðr; eíðan drap
Iaokull mere eina, oc opnoðo hána hiá briósteno, oc foerðo á súlona,
oc léto horfa heim at Borg.--Vatzd. Saga, ch. 34.

Hann toc í haond ser hesliss-staong oc geck á berg-snaos nockora
þá es visse til lannz inn: þá tóc hann hross-haofoð, oc sette upp á
staongena. Síðan veitte hann for-mála oc mælte:5

'Her set-ec upp níðstaong, oc sný-ec þesso níðe á haond N. N. oc
M. M.'--Hann snoere hross-haofðeno inn á land.--'Sný-ec þesso níðe
á land-vætter þær es þetta land byggja, svá at allar fare þær villar
vega: enge hende né hitte sítt inne, fyrr an þær reka N. N. oc M. M. or
lande.' Síðan scýtr hann staongenne niðr í biarg-rifo,10 oc lét þar
standa.--Egil's Saga, ch. 60.






SECTION V

V.

Manslaughter, degrees of. It was law at that time, if a man slew
another man's thrall, that that man should bring him thralls-gild, and
start on his way therewith before the third sun after the slaughter
of the thrall. It should be twelve ounces of silver, and if the
thralls-gild was lawfully paid there was no action for the slaughter
of the thrall.--Eyrb. Saga. ch. 43.

To slay by night is murder, or it is murder to slay by night.--Egil's
Saga.

It was then law that he was bound to revenge that took the weapon
out of the wound, and it was secret slaying, but not murder, when
men left their weapons standing in the wounds.--Gisl. Saga.



    If a man be put (for execution) on a rock in the sea, he is called
    a skerry-corse.
    If he be put in a pit, grave-corse.
    If he be [thrown over] a mountain or shut up in a cave, he is
    called fell-corse or cliff-corse.
    If he be hanged, he is called gallows-corse.



Libel. But if one come not, then nith or ill-fame shall be raised
against him with this form of words, 'that he shall be every
man's niddering, and never be in the fellowship of good men,
and have the wrath of the gods, and the name of a truce-breaker'
[lit. grith-niddering].--Vatzd. Saga, ch. 33.

They took a pillar ... Iokle cut a man's head on the pillar's end,
and raised or wrote runes with all that form of words that was
aforesaid. Then Iokle slew a mare, and opened her close to the
breast-bone, and put her up on the pillar, and made it turn towards
Borg.--Vatzd. Saga, ch. 34.

He took a hazel-pole in his hand, and went to a jutting rock
that looked landward. Then he took a horse-head and set it up on
a pole. Then he spake a form of words, saying, 'Here I set up a
nith-pole, and I turn this nith upon the hands of N. N. and M. M.' He
turned the horse-head in landwards. 'I turn this nith upon the
land-wights or spirits that dwell in this land, so that all they go
astray and none light on his home until they drive N. N. and M. M. out
of the land.' Then he stuck the pole down into a chink in the rock,
and let it stand there.--Egil's Saga, ch. 60.





SECTION VI

VI. Family Law.

Þá es Niaorðr vas með Vaonom, þá hafðe hann átta systor sína, þvi at
þat vóro þar laog.... En þat vas bannat með Ásom at byggja svá náet
at frændseme.--Yngl. Saga.

Oc þat vas þá siðvanðe noccorr, es land vas allt al-heiðet, at15 þeir
menn es fé-litler vóro, en stóð ómegð mioc til handa, léto út bera
baorn sín; oc þótte þó ílla goert ofallt.--Gunnl. Saga.

Cné-sett hefer þú hann nú (seger Haukr) oc máttú myrða hann ef þú
vill.--Kringla (Hac. S. Góða).

Þat barn es cvict es orðet í cviðe móðorenne áðr henne sé frelse20
gefet ... sá maðr heiter hrísungr.

Ef cona gefr frelse þræle sínom til þess at hon vill ganga með
hónom oc eiga hann, þá es þat barn oc eige arf-gengt es þau geta:
sá heiter hornungr.

Þat barn ... es kona sú getr es sec es orðen scógar-maðr, þó at hon
gete með sínom boanda ósecjom: oc heiter sá bæsingr.

Þat barn ... es sá maðr getr es secr es orðenn scógar-maðr, þó at5
hann gete við cono sínne sialfs: sá maðr heiter varg-drope.--Arfa
þáttr, p. 224.





SECTION VI

VI.

When Nerth was with the Wanes he had his sister to wife, for that
was their law.... But so near an affinity was forbidden among the
Anses.--Yngl. Saga.

And there was then a certain use and wont, when the land was all
heathen, for them that were of small means and had many helpless on
their hands to expose their children, yet it was always thought mean
or wicked.--Gunnl. Saga.

'Thou hast set him on thy knee now, and thou canst murder him if thou
will,' c. 930, said by Hawk to king Ethelstan.--Kringla (Hac. S.).

If a child be engendered in the mother's womb ere she be made free,
that child is called rushing or rush-begotten.

If a woman give freedom to her slave in order that she may consort
with him and take him as husband, that child cannot be a lawful heir
that they beget, and is called horning.

The child that a woman bear after she is outlawed, though he be
begotten by her sackless husband, is called bastard.

The child that a man begets after he is made an outlaw, though he
beget him on his own wife, is called wolf-drop.





SECTION VII

VII. Wicking Law.

1. Þat vas upp-haf laga þeirra, at þengat scylde einge maðr ráðasc
sá es ellre være an fimmtoegr [1204]: oc einge yngre an átián vettra:
þar á meðal scyldo aller vesa.10

2. Hvártke scylde því ráða frændseme, þó at þeir menn vilde þangat
ráðasc es eige være í þeim laogom [1205].

3. Enge maðr scylde þar renna fyre iam-víglegom oc iam-búnom.

4. Hverr scylde þar annars hefna sem bróðor síns.15

5. Enge scylde þar oeðro-orð mæla né kvíða ne einom hlut; hvege óvænt
sem um þoette.

6. Allt þat es þeir fenge í her-faorom, þá scylde til stangar bera,
minna hlut oc meira, þat es fé-mætt være; oc ef hann hefðe þat eige
goert, þá scylde hann í brauto verða.20

7. Enge scylde þar róg cveycva.

8. En ef tíðende fregnðesc, þá scylde einge svá hvat-víss, at þau
scylde í hávaða segja; þvi at Palna-Tóce scylde þar aoll tíðende segja.

9. Eingi maðr scylde cono hafa í borgena.

10. Oc eingi í braut vesa þrimr nóttom lengr.

11. Oc þó at við þeim manne være tecet, es veget hefðe faoðor
eða bróðor þess mannz es þar være áðr, eða naccvarn náenn mann,
oc coeme þat síðarr upp [1206], an við hónom være tecet, þá scylde
Palna-Tóce5 þat allt doema, oc hvatce mis-sætte annat es þeirra yrðe,
á miðle. Jomsv. Saga (Cod. Holm.).

Þat vas rícra manna siðr, conunga eða iarla, várra iafningja, at þeir
laógo í hernaðe, oc aofloðo ser fiár oc frama; oc scylde þat fé eige
til arfs telja, né sonr efter faoðor taca, heldr scylde þat fé í10
haug leggja hiá siaolfom þeim.--Vatzd. Saga, ch. 2.

1. Enge þeirra scylde hafa lengra sverð an alnar, svá scylde nær
ganga. Þeir léto goera saox til þess at þá scylde hoeggen stoere.

2. Aldrigi her-tóco þeir conor né baorn.

3. Enge scylde saór binda fyr an at iam-lengð annars dags.15

4. Enge þeirra hafðe minna afl an xij [read ii] meðal-menn.

5. Við oengom vas þeim tecet es minne vas at afle eðr hreyste an nú
vas sagt.

6. Þat vas siðr þeirra at liggja iamnan fyrer annesjom.

7. Þat vas annarr siðr þeirra, at tialda aldrigi á scipom, oc aldrigi20
hefla segl [1207] fyrer of-viðre.

8. Þeir vóro callaðer Álfs-reckar, oc hafðe hann aldregi fleire á
scipe an sextige [read, oc scylde enge vesa a scipe ellre an sextoegr].

Þá vas þat ráðs teket at hluta menn fyr borð at fara. Enn es þeir stigo
fyrer borð, mælto þeir: 'Strálaust es fyr stockom.'-- Half's Saga.

Þótte sá einn með fullo mega heita sæ-conongr, es hann svaf aldregi
under sótcom áse, oc dracc aldrege at árens-horne.--Yngl.5 Saga,
ch. 34.

Raognvaldr conongr vas þá mestr her-conungr [1208] í Vestr-laondom.

Þat vas þriá vetr es hann lá úte á her-scipom, svá at hann com eige
under sótcan raft.--Orkn. Saga, p. 225.

Enge maðr scylde vesa á Ormenom Langa ellre an sex-toegr, eða10 yngre
an tví-toegr.--Ol. Saga Tr.

Um kveldet es full scylde drecca, þa vas þat siðvenja cononga þeirra
es at laondom saóto, eða [1209] veizlom es þeir léto goera, at drecca
scylde á kveldom tví-menning, hvárr ser carl-maðr oc cona, svá sem
ynnesc, en þeir ser es fleire være saman. En þat vóro vícinga laog,15
þótt þeir være at veizlom, at drecca sveitar-dryccjo.--Yngl. Saga.

Þá scaut Steinþórr spióte at fornom sið til heilla ser, yfir flocc
Snorra, en spióteð leitaðe ser staðar.--Eyrb. ch. 44.

Sá selde hónom reyr-sprota í haond oc bað hann scióta hónom
yfer lið Styrbiarnar; oc þat scylde hann mæla: 'Óðinn á yðr20
alla.'--Flatb. ii. 72.





SECTION VII

VII.

Wicking Law. 1. This was the beginning of their law, that there should
no man enter that was older than fifty [sixty], and none younger than
eighteen winters. All must be between those ages.

2. Never should kinship be taken account of when they wished to enter
that were not in their league.

3. No man there should run before a man of like power or like arms.

4. Every man there should avenge the other as he would his brother.

5. None then should there speak a word of fear or dread of anything
however perilous things might be.

6. All that they took in warfare should be brought to the stang or
pole, little or big, that was of any value; and if a man had not done
this he must be driven out.

7. None there should kindle discussion or waken quarrel.

8. And if tidings came no man should be so rash as to tell it to any
one, but all tidings should be told to P. T. [the captain].

9. No man should bring a woman into the fort.

10. And none should be abroad three nights together.

11. And though one had been taken into fellowship that had slain father
or brother of a man that was there before, or any near kinsman, and it
was found out after he was received, then P. T. should judge the whole
case and whatever other quarrel might arise between them.--Jomsv. Saga.

It was noblemen's custom, kings' and earls', our peers, that they lay
out in warfare, and gained fee and fame, and this fee should not be
counted with the heritage, nor should the son take it after the father,
but it should be laid in the barrow by themselves.--Vatzd. Saga.

1. No man should have a sword longer than an ell, so close were they
to go; [and] they had saxes or knives made to this end that the blow
should be heavier.

2. They never took prisoners women nor children.

3. No man should bind a wound till the same hour the next day.

4. No man of them had less strength than two ordinary men.

5. No man was taken that was of less strength and valour than was
just said.

6. It was their custom to lie ever outside the nesses.

7. It was another custom of theirs never to put awnings on their
ships, and never to furl the sail for the wind.

8. They were called Alf's-renks or Alf's-champions, and none should
be older than sixty aboard his ship.

It was then settled that men should cast lots to be cast overboard,
and when they leapt overboard they would say, 'No straw-made bed
outside the ship's berths.'--Half's Saga.

He only might with full truth be called a sea-king that
never slept under a sooty rafter, and never drank in the
chimney-corner.--Yngl. Saga, ch. 34.

King Rogn-wald was then the greatest war-king in the Western lands. It
was three winters he had lain out in his war-ships without coming
under a smoky rafter.--Orkn. Saga, p. 225.

No man should be on the Long Serpent that was older than sixty or
younger than twenty.--Ol. Saga Tr.

In the evening, when the toasts were drunk, it was the use and wont
of kings when they sat at home or at feasts which they had made,
that folk should in the evening drink two together [in pairs], man
and woman together, as far as could be, but they that were over drunk
together. But it was wicking-law when they were at feasts to drink
in companies [each crew together].--Yngl. Saga.

Fecial Law. Then Stan-thor shot a spear in heathen fashion or
wise for luck over Snorre's company, but the spear found its
goal.--Eyrb. ch. 44.

He gave him a reed-wand in his hand and bade him shoot it over
Styr-beorn's crew, and he was to say as he did so, 'Woden shall have
you all.'--Flatb. ii. 72.






SECTION VIII

VIII. Merchant Law.

Þat vas þá caupmanna siðr, at hafa eige mat-sveina; en sialfer
maoto-nautar hlutaðo með ser, hverr búðar-vaorð scylde halda dag
frá dege.

Þá scyldo oc aller sciparar eiga drycc saman, oc scylde ker
standa við siglo es dryccrenn vas í, oc loc yfer kereno, en sumr5
dryccr vas í verplom, oc vas þaðan boett í keret, svá sem or vas
druccet.--Eyrb. ch. 39.

Í þann tíð es Cristne com út hingat til Íslannz gecc her silfr
í allar stór-sculder, bleict silfr, oc scylde halda scor, oc vesa
meire hlute silfrs, oc svá sleget, at lx penninga goerðe eyre vegenn;
oc10 vas þá allt eitt, talet oc veget. Þat vas iam-miket fé callat,
c silfrs sem iiij hundrað oc xx alna vaðmála oc verðr [1210] þá at
halfre maorc vaðmála eyrer.--Cod. Reg., p. 174 b.






SECTION VIII

VIII.

Chapman's Law. It was then the way with chapmen to have no cook
[lit. meat-swain], but the messmates cast lots among themselves who
should do the house-keeping [lit. booth-keeping] day by day.

And all the crew would have their drink in common, and a kettle or
butt should stand by the sail or mast [i. e. in the waist] which the
drink was in, and a lid over the kettle or butt; but some of the
drink was in tubs, and the butt was filled thence as it was drunk
out.--Eyrb. ch. 39.

At the time when Christendom came out hither to Iceland, silver passed
here in all great payments, white or blanched silver; and it must
stand cutting, and be the greater part of silver, and so struck that
sixty pennies made an ounce weight, and it was all one told or weighed.

It was called or proclaimed equal money 120 in silver and 480
and20 ells in wadmal, and then the ounce stands at half a mark of
wadmal.--Cod. Reg., p. 174 b.





SECTION IX

IX. Constitutional History.

Þórsteinn Ingolfs son lét setja fyrstr manna þing á Kialar-nese,
áðr Alþinge være [1211] sett, við ráð Helga Biólu oc Erlygs
at15 Esjoberge, oc annarra vitra manna. Oc fylger þar enn saocom
(þess) því goðorðe Alþinges-helgan. Þórkell Máne laogsaogo-maðr
vas son Þórsteins Ingolfs sonar. Þórmóðr vas son Þórkels, es þá vas
Alls-herjar-goðe es Cristne com á Ísland. Þórgeirr Liósvet­nínga goðe
vas þá laogsaogo-maðr.--Mela-bóc.

Svá sagðe vitr maðr Þórmóðr, es þá vas allz-herjar-goðe es Cristne
com á Ísland [1212], at með þessom orðom oc þing-maorkom helgaðo
lang-feðgar hans Alþinge.--[The formula missing.]--Mela-bóc.5

Þá vas landeno scift í fiórðunga, oc scyldo vesa þriú þíng í fiórðunge;
en þriú haofoð-hof í þíng-sócn hverre. Þar vóro menn valðer til at
geyma hofanna at vite oc réttlæte. Þeir scyldo nefna dóma á þingom,
oc stýra sac-ferle--því vóro þeir goðar [1213] callaðer. Hverr maðr
scylde gefa toll til hofs, sem nú til kircjo tiund.--Hawk's-bóc.10
See p. 187, l. 3.

Þetta sumar tóc [sleit] Þórsteinn or Hafsfiarðar-ey Rauð­melinga-goðorð
or Þórsness-þinge, þvi at hann þóttesc þar afl-vane orðet hafa fyrer
Snorrungom. Tóco þeir frændr þá upp þing í Straums-firðe, oc héldo
þat lenge síðan.--Eyrb. Saga, ch. 56.15

Law-making. En með því ... þá foerðo lannz-stiórnar-menn laog á því,
at aldrege scylde cona vesa víg-sacar-aðile, ne yngre carl-maðr an
sextán vetra; oc hefer þat haldesc iamnan síðan.--Eyrb. Saga, ch. 38.

[ Þá sagðe laogsaogo-maðr, at enge scylde lengr í sekð vera an20 xx
vetr allz, þó noccorr vetr yrðe millim sekta (or, þó at hann goerðe
út-legðar-verk á þeim tímom).]--Grette Saga.

[ Vas þá laog-teket, at alla forneskio menn goerðo þeir
útlaga.]--Grette Saga.

Efter þat leidde Skafte Þóroddz son í laog Fimtar-dóm, oc allt þat es
upp vas talet. Efter þat gengo menn til Laogbergs: tóco menn þá upp
ný goðorð.--Í Norðlendinga fiórðunge vóro þesse5 ný goðorð, Melmanna
goðorð í Miðfirðe, oc Laufæsinga goðorð í Eyjafirðe.--Niala, ch. 98.

[ Af því tók Eirikr iarl af allar holm-gaongor í Noregi; hann
goerðe oc útlaga alla ráns-menn oc berserke þá sem með óspekter
fóro.] [1214]--Grette Saga.10





SECTION IX

IX.

Constitutional History. Thor-stan Ing-wolf's son was the first of
men to set up a moot at Keel-ness, before All-moot was set up, by
the counsel of Helge Beolan and Er-lyg of Esie-berg and other wise
men. And it is hence that the hallowing of the All-moot follows this
gode-hood or priest-hood. Thor-kell Moon, the Speaker of the Laws,
was the son of Thor-stan Ing-wolf's son. Thor-mod was the son of
Thor-kell who was the Gode or Priest of the Whole Congregation or
Host when Christendom came to Iceland. Thor-gar, the gode or priest
of the Light-water-men, was Speaker of the Laws at that time.

So said the wise man Thor-mod, that was then Gode of the Whole
Congregation when Christendom came to Iceland, that with these words
and moot-marks his forbears hallowed the All-moot. [The formula
is lost.]

Then the land was divided into Quarters, and there were to be three
Moots in each Quarter, and three Head-temples in each Moot-soken. There
were men chosen to keep the temples with wisdom and righteousness. They
were to name the dooms at the moots and direct the case-fees or fines,
wherefore they were called godes or priests. Every man had to give
toll to the temple, just as tithe to a church now-a-days.--Hawk's-book.

Secession. That summer Thor-stan of Hafs-frith-ey took the gode-hood of
the Red-mell-men out of the Thors-ness-moot, because he thought that
he had been worsted by the Snorrungs. He and his kinsmen took up with
a moot in Stream-frith, and it lasted so for a long time.--Eyrb. Saga,
ch. 56.

Wherefore ... then the rulers of the land made this law withal, that a
woman should never be the suitor or pursuer in a case of manslaughter,
nor a man younger than sixteen winters, and this hath ever since held
good.--Eyrb. Saga, ch. 38.

[Then the Speaker of the Laws said that no man should be longer
in full outlawry than twenty years in all, even though there were
a break between the outlawries, or although he wrought a deed of
outlawry during that time.]--Grette Saga.


[It was then made law that all wizards were made outlaws.]--Grette.

After that Shafto Thor-ordsson brought the Fifth Court into the laws
and all that was told above. After that men went to the Hill of Laws;
then men took up new gode-hoods. In the North-landers' Quarter were
these new gode-hoods--the Mel-men's gode-hood in Mid-frith and the
Laufas-men's gode-hood in Ey-frith.--Niala.

[Wherefore earl Eiric did away with all wagers of battle in Norway;
moreover he made all robbers and bear-sarks, that went about with
riots or breach of peace, outlaws.]--Grette.





SECTION X

X. Early Christian Custom.

Þvi at þat vas þá micell siðr bæðe með caup-maonnom, oc þeim es á mála
gengo með Cristnom maonnom: þvi at þeir menn er prim-signaðer vóro,
haofðu allt sam-neyte við Cristna menn oc svá heiðna, en haofðo þat
at átrúnaðe, es þeim vas scap-felldaz.--Egil's Saga, ch. 50.15

Hvatte menn þat mioc til circjo-gerðar at þat vas fyrir-heit
cenne-manna, at maðr scylde iam-maorgom maonnom eiga heimolt
rúm í himin-ríce sem standa mætte í circjo þeirre es hann léte
goera.--Eyrb. Saga, ch. 49.





SECTION X

X.

Prime-signing. Because it was then much the way there both with
merchants, and them that took service with Christian men, because
those men that were prime-signed [marked with the cross] could have
full intercourse with Christian men, and also with heathen, and they
could hold to the creed which was to their mind.--Egil's Saga, ch. 50.

Church-building. This made men very eager in church-building, which
was promised by the clergy, that a man should have room in the kingdom
of heaven for as many men as could stand in the church that he had
built.--Eyrb. Saga, ch. 49.











[In lieu of the ancient 'fencing' of the All-moot which is lost
(see p. 328), we give the one in use in the 16th century, from a
16th-century vellum.]


To open or set-up the All-moot at Ax-water-moot.

The peace and blessing of our Lord Jesus Christ be with us Law-moot-men
all now and evermore.

I, N. N.'s son, Law-man, N. and N. in Iceland, set up here to-day
the General or All-men's Ax-water-moot, with all right and rent,
way and worship, that a lawful Law-moot ought to have according to law.

I set up here both grith and full frith all men between, both without
this Law-court and within.

I forbid every man to waken battle or debate.

And if any one break this grith, and slay a man, or deal a disabling
wound, he shall forfeit fee and frith, land and chattels, and never
come back to the country.

And if a man shall commit any assault or insult upon another, by his
wish or will [i. e. maliciously], or aim and intent, their right or
fine is made greater by half, i. e. doubled, and thirteen marks to
the king.

No man shall take either weapon or drink to the Law-court, and if
it be taken thither it shall be taken away, half the weapon and half
the outlawry fine; and half to the men of the Moot, but the Moot-men
shall have all the drink. And if any one fall into meat or drink,
and busy himself with that rather than the Moot, he shall not have
furtherance of his suit the day that he doth so whatsoever case he
hath on hand at Ax-water-moot.

All those stewards or bailiffs and Law-court-men that have not
heretofore taken their Law-court oaths shall now take their oaths
before they go into the Law-court according to the form of oaths which
the Law-book giveth, and none of those men that are not named to the
Law-court shall sit within the hallowing bands or bar without leave.

And I forbid all and every man that is without the Law-court to make
any brawling or babbling so that the Law-court-men may not go on with
their judgments or plead their cases, as they have gotten lawful leave
to do, for inasmuch as in all places it behoveth men to observe a
quiet and seemly behaviour, so most especially in those places that
are set apart for quiet and seemly behaviour, and to that end first
established, and wherein there may be done most harm to many men if
they be not observed in any point.

The Moot ought to stand as long as the Law-man will, and as he think
fit by reason of the suits and the agreement of the Law-court-men;
wherefore all those men that are named to the Law-court shall sit
here as it is now said, save they go away for instant needs.

And whenever men shall be fined at Ax-water-moot, the king hath half
the fee and the Law-man with the Law-court-men half, save thane-gild
and a thirteen mark case or more which the king hath.

Let men sit at the Moot with quiet and seemly behaviour, and let no
man go away till the Moot is closed.

Let us now hold this Moot and all others so that it be to the praise
and glory of our Lord Jesus Christ and our lord the King of Norway's
crown, and to the way and worship of his governors both clerk and lay,
and to the honour of ourselves that are now come together here, and to
the peace and profit, fruit and freedom of the land and commonalty,
and of our heirs and aftercomers, and for an everlasting example in
all good things.

Grant this God, Father and Son and Holy Ghost, one God, King of all
kings, that liveth and reigneth and governeth all worlds now and
ever. Amen.


To close the All-moot.

God, Father, Son and Holy Ghost, thank and reward all those men that
have sought and set this Moot with frith and freedom, with grave and
good counsel, on God's behalf and men's. And now the Moot is over and
ended, and with this closure every man may take his leave wheresoever
it please him best.

And all the men that are on the Ax-water-moot way shall be in grith
towards every other man till they come home to their homestead,
going along the right Moot-men's ways.

And if any break this grith, slay a man or deal a disabling wound,
he shall forfeit fee and frith, land and chattel, and never come back
again to the country.

And the sheriffs shall hold Moot at leets when they come home from
Ax-water-moot, and proclaim there all the proclamation which they
ought by law to proclaim.

And I proclaim here to all good men that we shall hold our Law-moot
here at Ax-water-moot at the right Moot-stead every twelvemonth,
and come here on Peter's mass eve. Here we shall all meet without
lawful hindrance, that are named for the Moot; and the Steward and
his lawful deputy shall have named before Easter so many men out of
each Moot as the Law-book declareth, or be fined twelve ounces for
each that shall be unnamed or wrongly named.

Now may all those men that have sought to this Moot the law to fulfil,
the right to uphold, have for their pains in hither coming God's grace
and good men's thanks, and depart in peace!--Safn til Sogu Islandz,
II. 184-186.

Of Heritage-taking.



    The son ought to take the heritage after his father and mother,
    freeborn and
heritable.
    Then shall the daughter born clean-born [born in wedlock] [take]
    the heritage,
    Then the father,
    Then the brother by the same father,
    Then the mother,
    Then the sister by the same father,
    Then the brother by the same mother,
    Then the sister by the same mother.




    Then the bastard son,
    Then the bastard daughter,
    Then the bastard brother by the same father,
    Then the bastard sister by the same father,
    Then the bastard brother by the same mother,
    Then the bastard sister by the same mother.



    These are the next men to the heritage freeborn--

        Father's father and mother's father.
        Son's son and daughter's son.




    Next to these ought to take--

        Father's mother and mother's mother.
        Son's daughter and daughter's daughter.




    Then ought to take--

        Father's brother and mother's brother.
        Brother's son and sister's son.




    Afterward these ought to take--

        Father's sister and mother's sister.
        Brother's daughter and sister's daughter.   [See Inheritance
        Law, p. 333.]




Thenceforward the nearest descendant, freeborn and heritable, is the
one to take the heritage.

No heritage shall any bastard take farther than after his father and
mother and sister and brother.

A bastard son hath the suit for his father's daughter.

If a man be as near as a woman the man shall take all; if women
be nearest then the heritage is parted among them. Not all men are
heritable though they be freeborn.

That man is not heritable whose mother was not bought with a mund
of a mark or more money, or that had no bridal made for her, or that
was not handfasted.

A woman is bought with a mund when a mark of six-ell-ounces is paid
for her mund or handselled, or else a greater fee.

A bridal is lawful made if the lawful guardian handfast the woman
and there be six men at the bridal at the least, and the bridegroom
goeth with light in the same bed with the woman.

That child whose mother is bought with a mund is heritable if he come
living into the light, and meat once into his mouth.

The man is not heritable that knoweth not whether the deep saddle shall
be turned backward or forward on the horse or how it shall be turned,
but if he have more understanding than that he shall have his share
of the heritage.

Of heritable men. If a man die and he have a child in hope, the child
is not heritable save he come living into the light and meat come
into his mouth.

The man is not heritable that a thrall has got upon a freewoman.

[Here follow the clauses on hrísung, hornung, bæsing, varg-drope;
see p. 323.]

The man is not heritable that is born in beggary.

Of freed folk's heritage. A man ought to take after his freedman or
freedwoman, save they have born to them a son or daughter. If they be
dear-born [wedlock-born], then the son ought to take; and if there
be no son, then the daughter shall take. But if they die childless,
then the property ought to go back as free-gift.

Of aliens' heritage. If a man die out here and hath no kin here in
the country, then his fellow [partner] ought to take the heritage....

But if he have no fellow, then his messmates shall take; and if his
messmates be more than one, then he shall take that hath most often
ate meat with him....

And if he were alone in his mess, then the skipper shall take. And
if the skippers be more than one, then they shall take according as
they own shares in the ship....

If later come out heirs that be of the Danish tongue, they ought to
take heritage and amends if they be.

And he ought to use to take the heritage after outlawed men here
and kinless men, that ought to have the weregild after them if they
were slain.

Northern-men and Danish and Swedish ought to take heritage here after
their kinsmen to their third cousins and nearer....

Of partnership or fellowship. If a man make a partner or fellow with
him here in the land and go abroad and die elsewhere, then he shall
not break up the partnership before he hath found the heir.--Arfa
tháttr. Cod. Reg. i. 218 sqq.



------
FIGURE

Weregild Law.                     Bauga-tal.

[**ERROR: unhandled comment start]

          /================================\
         /                                  \
        /     /========================\     \
       /     /                          \     \
      /     /       /==ff====-mf==\      \     \
      |     |      /               \     |     |
      |     fb    /     /==f==\     |    mb    |
     fss    |     |    /       \    |    |     mbs
      |     |     |    b   V   |    |    |     |
     fbs    |     |    \       /    |    |     fss
      |     bs    \     \==s==/     /    ss    |
      |     |      \               /     |     |
      \     \       \==ss====-ds==/      /     /
       \     \                          /     /
        \     \========================/     /
         \                                  /
          \================================/
-->

------



Inheritance Law.


    2nd cousins.
    3rd cousins.
    4th cousins.



------
FIGURE


[**ERROR: unhandled comment start]
                          15     17     15     17
                         f.f.===f.m.   m.f.===m.m.
                              |             |
   ============================-          ============================-
   |          |                |          |                |          |
f.b. 19    f.s. 21    s.m.===f. 3   ===  m. 5===s.f.    m.b. 19
m.s. 21
                           |   |     |    |   |
    ========================   |     |    |   ========================
    |                          |     |    |                          |
    |               ============     |    ============               |
    |               |                |               |               |
 ========       ==========           |           ==========
 ========
 |      |       |        |           |           |        |
 |      |
g.b.   g.s.   g.b.b.   g.b.s.   c.==-H.===w.   u.b.b.   u.b.s.   u.b.
u.s.
 4      6       11       12        |    |        13       14
 7      8
 |      |                          |    |                         |
 |
 |      ==============-            |    |        ==================
 |
 |             |      |            |    |        |       |
 |
 |========     |      |      ======|    |====    |       |
 ========|
 |       |     |      |      |     |    |   |    |       |       |
 |
20    g.s.d.   20   g.s.d.  b.s.  b.d.  s.  d.   20      22      20
22
b.s.    22    s.s.    22     9     10   1   2   u.b.s.  u.b.d.  u.s.s.
u.s.d.
                                        |   |
                              ==========-   ==========-
                              |       |       |       |
                             s.s.    s.d.    d.s.    d.d.
                              16      18      16      18
-->

------







CHAPTER 3

§ 3. EARLY CONSTITUTIONAL LAW OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF ICELAND.


We trust that the whole subject of the Law and Custom of Iceland may
be treated some day by Mr. Councillor Finsen, of the Supreme Court,
Copenhagen, who has given such careful and scholarly editions of
its texts. We here print in due order the documents upon which our
knowledge of the rise of the Commonwealth and its Law depends,
as gleaned from the law-books and scrolls of the Classic period
[1100-1200]. It is no great mass, but its value is high. It supplements
Are's work, and supplies the legal background against which the
feuds and alliances of the great families vividly stand out in the
old histories of the early days of this northern Teutonic state.

Our authority is an MS. codex regius 1157 of the so-called Grá-gás
or Grey-Goose, a compilation the last novella of which, that on
Forbidden Degrees, dates from 1217, the MS. itself not being later
than c. 1230. It was edited by Finsen, 1850 sqq.

The second vellum of Icelandic Law is well-nigh half a century younger,
and compiled at a time when the old constitution was essentially
destroyed, c. 1272; hence it omits all the constitutional and
historical sections, which the earlier MS. contained.

Judging from the care of its writing and the beauty of its vellum,
the codex regius was written for some rich Icelandic chief, whom for
reasons noticed in p. 284 we believe to have lived in the northern
diocese.

It is a corpus juris made up from the different separate scrolls or
tractates then current, in which the several sections of the law
were dealt with. These scrolls, as it is recorded, differed among
themselves, and their distinctive authorities had to be settled when
these private compilations, originally made by great lawyers for their
own use, became the authorities and text-books for later generations.

The pieces here printed, and for the first time Englished, are--


    Log-rétlo Þóttr, or the Title dealing with the Courts of
    Law. Ed. i. p. 211.
    Log-sögu-manz Þóttr, or the Title dealing with the
    Law-speaker. Ed. i. p. 208.
    Þing-scapa Þóttr, or the Title dealing with
    Moot-setting. Ed. i. p. 38 sqq.


Of this last only the older customs and laws are here given.

Since the writing of the note on the position of the Hill of Laws at
the All-moot, given in Sturlunga, vol. ii. 505 ff., and touched on
in the Corpus Poet. Bor. vol. ii. p. 496 n., the Editor has visited
the Tinwald in the Isle of Man, and an examination of the position
of the Law Hill and Court there, right east and west, has enabled
him to understand more clearly the exact position of the Law Hill
and the Court of Laws at the All-moot. In the Sturlunga Note it was
proved that the Hill of Laws was on the brink of the Great Rift, and
that the Court of Laws was near it to the east. This all stands good,
but a fresh examination of the evidence modifies the position of the
Hill of Laws on the All-men's Rift, and fixes what was only guessed
at before, and is wrongly given on the little map to the Sturlunga
Note--the position of the Court of Laws, and the Law Rock or Hill.

In the Isle of Man, as in any ancient Norse Moot-place, three things
are to be noticed: a plain [voll], whereon there were to be found the
hillock brink or mound, and the court. The court is due west of the
hill. The procession on the 24th of June [5 July N.S.] proceeds from
the court to the mound. The king, seated on the hill, had to turn
his 'visage unto the east.' The Manx Tinwald and the Icel. All-moot
correspond in each particular point--

The Tin-wald answers to the Icel. Þing-voll-r; the Tinwald-hill
to the Icel. Log-berg, or Thing-brecca; the House of Keys to the
Icel. Logrétta; the chapel to the temple of heathen days.

The 24th June procession answers to the Icel. Logbergis-ganga, or
dóma-út-færsla on the first Saturday of every session, the distance
between hill and court being about 140 yards in each case.

The path, being fenced in like the court and hill, and used for this
solemn procession when the judges and officers go to and fro between
them, would answer to the Icel. 'Þingvallar-traðer,' mentioned in the
'Booth-Catastasis,' or description of year 1700.

The Isle of Man Deemsters (dóm-stiórar, deem-steerers) answer to
the Icelandic Law-man or Law-speaker. There were two Deemsters in
the Isle of Man, because its central Tinwald is a union of two older
separate Tinwalds, each of which kept its Law-speaker, when the two
were united in one central Moot. The Keys answer to the bench of godes,
being two benches of twelve godes, just as in Iceland there were four
benches of each twelve godes.

The Manx Tinwald is a guide to us, inasmuch as that now, wherever we
are able to fix on either hill or court on a moot-field, the other
is to be found due east or west, as the case may be. In Iceland,
after the union with Norway, at the end of the 13th century, every
notion of the Hill of Laws (the most important item in the moot
system) was obliterated or confused, and Court and Hill are mixed up
hopelessly together as if it were the same thing. Tradition has died
out, and a bastard tradition, manufactured by modern antiquaries,
has arisen in its stead. Besides this, physical changes have taken
place. The river has altered its course, and the site of the 'holm'
or islet (Ax-water-holm) is no longer the same (nor perhaps even was
so in 1563) as in the days of the Commonwealth. The soil is volcanic,
and several earthquakes have taken place, some chronicled (as that
of 1789), others not.

The Icelandic Court of Laws was to be moved by Royal leave in 1563,
and was actually moved in 1579 from the old site, and taken to the
spot beneath Hlad-booth, where it is figured in the woodcut to the
Sturlunga Note, the reason being that the river Ax was encroaching
upon the old site. The King's Letter and the statement in the tractate
'Booth-Catastasis' of 1700 are our authorities. The latter says that
the old site was 'on the holm' near where the lieutenant-governor's
booth used to stand. Now the governor's booth was near the bishop's,
the bishop's was near the church of Tingwald [1215]. And hard by the
church is the little mound called Clock-hillock, where, we take it,
the great bell, presented to the Icelanders by King Harold Sigurdsson,
and used for the summons of the courts, and for no other purpose
[1216], was hung. Near it therefore the old Court of Laws must have
been, on the elbow round which the Ax winds in fact. Thence to the
west over the bridge ran the path straight up to the brink of the
rift. To the north of it was the Eyre, which probably represents all
that is left of the holm, where the wagers of battle were fought,
and the Eyre whereon, about 1541, the 180 men of Are the Lawman stood
in array to overawe the Court of Laws below them.

Now adding to what is recorded the example of the Manx Tinwald, one
sees that the Rock of Laws must have been a spot on the east brink
of the Great Rift due west of the Court of Laws. The exact spot could
probably be fixed by an accurate survey on a fairly large scale.

The notices about the position of the sun are two: the one, giving
the position as above the Tingwald (which we take to mean the Tingwald
kirk or homestead), denotes the eastern position of the sun, marking
the beginning of the working day, when the Court was sat. The other
marks a western position, a westering sun on a crag called 'Hamarr,'
on the upper wall of the All-men's-cleft: which crag we would identify
as the one now called Mideve-peak. Both positions were taken from
the Law-hill, the central point of every old Teutonic moot-place.

The Court of Laws was to meet when the sun was on Tingwald (the
singular is always used in the old times down to 1600, 'á Þingvelle,'
not 'á Þing-vollom'), that is, when the sun stands over Tingwald
homestead. This would be about 9 a.m., when the sun is due east from
the Law-man's seat at the Hill of Laws looking east. The Court was to
close when, from the Law-man's seat, looking west to the west cliff
of the ravine, the sun stood above a jutting rock or crag conspicuous
therefrom about 5 p.m. on the Moot-days. The former interpretations
of the passages, which, plainly read, yield these statements, commit
their believers to the absurdity of imagining that the Court of Laws
opened about 2.40 a.m. and closed five minutes after.

The Norse Frostathing-law orders men to come to the Moot when the sun
is in the east, and remain there till the nones [p.m.]. The sun 'in
the east' here answers to the 'sun on Tingwald' in the Icel. All-moot,
and the 'nones' to 'sól á giá-hamre.'

In Iceland the godes had to put in an appearance on Thursday a.m. ere
the sun had left the east, and was not yet off Tingwald homestead. In
the Norse Gulathing-law 'whilst the sun is in the sky' is the hour
(at upp-vesande sólo).

We do not know, having no evidence, where the Quarter-courts were held,
probably somewhere hard by the Court of Laws.

One can only guess at the way in which the Hill of Laws was set by
the example of the Manx Tinwald hill. The Law-man's seat is mentioned
in the Icelandic authorities.

The Hill and the Temple were the two holy spots, not the Court. The
king sat on the hill, not in the court. Even at the present
day the Manx look on the Tinwald hill as their hill of liberty,
and rightly so. Antiquaries wanting to dig into the mound are
warned off as right-minded Englishmen would forbid digging into
Shakespear's grave. In days of old Hill and Court were, as it were,
twins. Discussions, enactments of laws and decisions of law points
took place in the Court, but anything partaking of proclamation,
declaration, publication was done from the Hill. It was the people's
place, hence the name 'All-men's cleft' at the All-moot in Iceland. One
must try to realise how, during session, intercourse between the two
must have played like a weaver's shuttle to and fro, men incessantly
passing from one place to another by the fenced path. In Iceland
summons and challenge of jurors took place on the Law-rock. The word
'hamar-scard,' cliff-edge, might and ought long ago to have put the
learned on the track of the true site of the Hill.

The arrangement of the Isle of Man Tinwald and the Icelandic All-moot
is one that no doubt obtained in other Teutonic nations, the Hill
for proclamations standing due west of the Law-court. This Court in
early days was no doubt held within the temenos of a temple (the Keys
still sit in the southern transept of the Chapel of S. John). It is
not by accident that court and church are so close at Tingwald in
Iceland. At the older Keel-ness-moot too the temple with its pit for
executions was at the moot-stead.



------
FIGURE

Court of Laws.
------



[**TODO: Verify table]
   g.      Gangway.
   H.      Bishop of Holar.
   S.      Bishop of Scalholt.
   L.      Law-speaker.
   12 G.   The middle bench with the Twelves of Godes.
   12 A.   The outer and inner benches with the Twelves of Assessors.
   P. D.   Pursuer and Defendant.



In 1691 the Court of Laws was for the first time held under a roof
instead of in the open air.--Safn ii. 139.

The sketch-map given on p. 338 will show what we take to have been
the primitive arrangement of that famous moot-stead, the Icelandic
Al-thing in the old days.



------
FIGURE

The Great Moot, or Al-thing, in The Old Days Before 1230.

------
In technical language the Law-court when 'set' proceeds to 'fare
out' or 'go forth,' a phrase showing that the body started from
some enclosed place--temenos or temple, after a sacrifice had been
performed. In Are's days we believe the court still 'fared out'
of the churchyard after hearing mass. When Thorkell was Law-speaker
there must have been a heathen temple at the Moot (possibly on the
spot where the church afterwards stood), though there is no record
of it, save it be in Libellus 2. 3, as emended.






Laogrétto Þóttr.

1. Laogrétto scolo ver oc eiga oc hafa her hvert sumar á Alþinge,
oc scal hon sitja í þeim stað ofallt sem lenge hefer veret.

2. Þar scolo pallar þrír vesa umb-hverfiss laogréttona svá víðer,
at rúmlega mege sitja á hverjom þeirra fernar tylfter manna.

Þat ero tolf menn or fiórðunge hverjom es laogrétto-seto eigo,
oc5 Laogsogo-maðr umb framm, svá at þar scolo ráða laogom oc lofom:
þeir scolo aller sitja á mið-palle, oc þar eigo byscopar órer rúm.

3. Þeir menn tolf eigo laogrétto-seto or Norðlendinga fiórðunge,
es fara með goðorð þau tolf, es þar vóro þá haofð es þeir aótto þing
fiogor, en goðar þrír í hverjo þinge.10

4. En í aollom fiórðungom aoðrom, þá eigo menn þeir nio laogrétto-seto
or fiórðunge hverjom, es fara með goðorð full oc forn, þau es þá
vóro þriú í vár-þinge hverjo, es þing vóro þriú í fiórðunge hverjom,
þeirra þriggja: enda scolo þeir aller hafa með ser mann einn or þinge
hverjo eno forna, svá at þó eignesc tolf menn15 laogrétto-seto or
fiórðunge hverjom: en forn goðorð Norðlendinga aoll ero fiórðunge
scerð at Alþingis-nefno við full goðorð aonnor á lande her.

5. Þat es oc um þá menn alla es svá eigo laogrétto seto sem nú vas
tínt, at þeirra hverr á at scipa tveim maonnom í laogrétto til20
umb-ráða með ser, aoðrom fyrer ser, en aoðrom á bac ser, oc sínom
þing-maonnom: þá verða pallar scipaðer til fullz oc fernar tylfter
manna á hverjom palle.

6. Enger menn scolo sitja firer innan palla þá es laogrétta es rudd,
nema þeir es maól eigosc við; en sitja ofallt þess á miðle, oc á
laogsaogo-maðr at scipa rúm þat: út frá paollom á alþýða at sitja.5

7. Þeim einom maonnom es rétt at standa upp at laogrétto, þá es þar
scal koera laog eða lof, es um maól manna scolo doema, oc þeim aoðrom
es yzter ero þeirra es þar ero comner: útlagr es hverr þrimr maorcom
es eige goerr svá, oc á sá saoc es vill.

8. En ef menn troðasc svá mioc at laogrétto fyrer aond-cost, eða10
goera þar hrang þat eða há-reyste, at fyrer því af-glapasc maól manna;
oc varðar þat fiorbaugs-garð sem aoll þings-afglaopon.

9. Ef þeir menn coma til laogrétto es þar eigo setor, en aðrer
hafa sezc í rúm þeirra, þá scolo þeir beiða ser rúma, oc es hinom
vítis-laust ef þeir ganga þá í braut. En ef þeir híra við þá es
rúms15 es beitt, oc varðar þat þriggja marca útlegð. Þá scal eigande
beiða seto sínnar með vátta, oc varðar þat fiorbaugs-garð ef þá es
varnat. Þat ero allt stefno sacar, oc scal kveðja nio heimilis-búa
þess er sóttr es til fiorbaugs saca, en fimm til útlegðar.

10. Þat es oc, at laogrétta scal út fara Dróttins-daga báða í þinge,20
oc þinglausna-dag, oc ofallt þess í miðle es laogsaogo-maðr vill eða
meire hlutr manna, oc í hvert sinn es menn vilja ryðia laogrétto.

11. Þar scolo menn rétta laog sín oc goera nýmæle ef vilja.

12. Þar scal beiða maonnom sycno leyfa allra, oc sátta leyfa þeirra
allra es einca-lofs scal at beiða, oc margra lofa annarra, svá sem
tínt es í laogom.

13. Þat scal allt metasc svá í laogrétto sem lofat sé es enge
maðr5 neiter, sá es laogrétto-seto á: enda vere enge lýrite fyrer
útan laogrétto. Hverr maðr þeirra es laogrétto-seto á, scal goera
annat-tveggja um leyfe hvert, at iáta eða níta: útlagr es hann ella
þrimr maorcom.

14. Ef menn biðja lofa í laogrétto, svá at þeir menn ero ógoerla10 þar
comner eða á braut gengner es laogrétto-seto eigo, en þó ero fernar
tylfter manna eða fleire, þá má laogsaogo-maðr scipa því liðe í rúm
þeirra manna es setor eigo, til fullz; oc útlagasc hverr es synjar
þess. Nú verðr mið-pallr al-scipaðr: þá scal laogsaogo-maðr nefna
ser vátta: 'Í þat vætte,' scal hann cveða,15 'at þesser sitja aller
í laogrétto at míno ráðe, oc rétter til þess at fylla laog oc lof;
nefne-ec þetta vætte at laogom hveim es nióta þarf.' Enda scolo þá
verða lof iamn-faost þar, sem goðar sæte sialfer; oc fyrir þeim einom
scolo hiner upp rísa es áðr saóto.20

15. Þat es oc, at þat scolo laog vesa á lande her sem á scraóm
standa. En ef scrár scilr á, oc scal þat hafa es stendr á scraóm þeim
es byscopar eigo. Nú scilr enn þeirra scrár á, þá scal sú hafa sítt
mál, es lengra seger, þeim orðom es mále scipta með maonnom. En ef
þær segja iamn-langt, oc þó sítt hvár, þá scal sú hafa sítt mál es
í Scála-hollte es.

16. Þat scal allt hafa es finnsc á scraó þeirre es Hafliðe lét goera,
nema þocat sé síðan: en þat eitt af annarra laogmanna firer-saogn
es eigi mæle því í gegn: oc allt þat hafa es hitzog leifer, eða
gloeg­gra5 es.

17. Nú þræta menn um laogmál, oc má þá ryðja laogrétto til, ef eige
scera scrár or.

18. En svá scal at því [1217] fara, at beiða með vátta goða alla at
Laogberge oc laogsaogo-mann, at þeir gange í laogrétto oc í setor10
sínar, at greiða laogmál þetta svá sem heðan frá scal vesa 'Beiðe ec
laogbeiðing' scal sá kveða, es reyna vill.

19. Ef noccorer þeir menn es setor eigo goera eige ganga í rúm sín,
es þeir vito at laogrétto scal ryðja, oc varðar þat fior-baugs-garð
sem aonnor þings-afglaopon: enda es rétt, at telja goðann þá15 hvern
útlagan þrimr maorcom oc or goðorðe síno: þat varðar oc allt slíct et
sama þeim maonnom aollom es laogrétto-seto eigo, at gegna at laogrétto
því sem þá scylda laog til.

20. Alengr, es goðar coma í setor sínar, þá scal hverr þeirra scipa
manne á pall fyrer sic, en aoðrom manne á enn yzta pall20 a bac ser,
til umbráða.

Síðan scolo þeir menn es þar eigosc maól við, tína laogmál þat es þá
scilr á, oc segja til þess hvat í deiler með þeim.

Þá eigo menn síðan at meta maól þeirra til þess es þeir hafa ráðenn
hug sínn um þat mál; oc spyrja síðan alla laogrétto-menn þá es
á mið-palle sitja, at scýra þat, hvat hverr þeirra vill laog um
þat mál. Síðan scal hverr goðe segja hvat laogen mun [1218] calla,
oc með hvaórom hverfa at því mále, oc scal afl ráða. En ef þeir ero
iam-marger5 laogrétto-menn hvárer-tveggjo, es sítt calla laog hvárer
vesa, þá scolo þeir hafa sítt mál, es laogsaogo-maðr es í liðe með.

21. En ef aðrer ero fleire, þá scolo þeir ráða; oc scolo hvárer-tveggjo
vinna véfangs-eið at síno mále, oc fela under eið sínn, at þeir
hyggja þat vesa laog um þat mál sem þeir fylgja at; oc10 cveða á,
af hví þat sé laog.

22. Nú es noccorr laogrétto-maðr svá siúkr eða sárr, at sá má eige
úte vesa: þá scolo þeir hvárer-tveggjo soekja orð hans til búðar,
oc segja hvat í deiler með þeim; en hann scal eið vinna slícan sem
aðrer, oc cveða á þat með hvaórom hann vill hverfa.15

23. En ef þá es laogrétto-maðr noccorr ó-mále eða ó-vite [1219] eða
andaðr es þessa máls þarf: oc scal sá maðr í stað hans, es dóm-nefno
átte upp at taca ef hans være þá við misst.

24. Nú lýsa laogrétto-menn hug sínn, oc verða þeir tolf eða fleire,
es lið hafa minna, þá scolo þeir es fære ero saman, vinna eiða at20
síno mále. Þá verða hiner es lið hafa meira oc scylder at vinna eiða
at síno mále, svá at þeir svere manne fleire eða tveimr et fæsta, ef
laogsaogo-maðr es í enne minne sveit. En ef þeir metasc eiða við í eno
meira liðe, oc scolo þeir hluta með ser, nema þeir vile aller sverja.

25. Nú verða þeir fære saman an tolf es lið hafa minna, þá ero þeir
þegar af síno mále; oc ero enger menn or eno meira liðe þá5 scylder
at vinna eiða at móte eiðom þeirra es fære ero saman an tolf.

26. Ef þeir ero noccorer laogrétto-menn es með hvaóronge látasc vesa
mono, eða varna þeir annarra scila um þau maól: oc varðar þat allt
slíct sem áðr vas tínt, oc á sá þeirra sacar þær es þar eigosc10
maól við, es heldr vill soekja til fullra laga. En ef hvárrgi vill
soekja, þá á saoc þá hvárr es vill: enda scal laogsaogo-maðr scipa
rúm þeirra manna es þar goera enge [1220] laog-scil firer sec; oc
taca mann or vár-þinge því es glaopen coemr, ef þat má: enda varðar
þá hverjom fiorbaugs-garð es synjar þess. En ef laogsaogo-maðr cann
þar eige15 menn firer í þá sveit, þá scal hann beiða samþingis-goða
þess es scila varnar, at þeir fáe hónom mann í stað, svá at þá mege
í því fylla laogrétto: oc varðar þá slíct þeim es þess synjar sem
hinom es glaop goerðe.

27. Nú vill enge sam-þingis-goðanna scil goera, þá scal beiða20 manna
í annat þing, oc í et þriðja, ef eige fæzc áðr: enda eigo þá iam-micit
þeirra orð at standasc sem annarra laogrétto-manna.

28. Þat es oc, at (einn) [1221] hverr maðr scal tína við vátta,
laogmál þat es afl fæsc til, en aller scolo sam-cvæðe gialda á:
síðan scal upp segja at Laogberge.

29. Þat es oc scyllt þeim maonnom aollom es laogrétto-seto eigo,
at fylla upp-saogo ofallt, es laogsaogo-maðr vill laog upp segja,
hvárt sem þat es at Laogberge, eða í laogrétto; oc þótt í kirkjo sé,
ef veðr5 es ó-svást úte.

30. En ef noccorer laogrétto-menn hafa eige tom til þess, þá scolo
þeir menn tveir heyra á upp-saogo fyrir hvern þeirra, es til þess
ero tecner af þeim, at sitja á paollom í laogrétto.

31. Nú es at hvaórego gaumr gefenn, þá mego ecke standasc10 þeirra
laogrétto-manna orð, es svá scipa, á sama sumre.

32. Þar es um þat laogmál es þrætt es þá vas upp sagt, enda varðar
þriggja marca útlegð, oc eigo aðrer laogrétto-menn saoc þá, oc
scal stefna at Laogberge, oc kveðja til heimilis-búa fimm þess es
sóttr es.15

33. En laogsaogo-maðr á at scipa laogberg, oc út-lagasc þeir þrimr
maorcom es at ólofe hans sitja þar.

34. Nú bióða menn þau óscil laogsaogo-manne, at láta hann eige ná
seto sínne, eða þá menn es hann hefer ein-nefnda til þess at sitja
at Laogberge; oc varðar þat fiorbaugs-garð, oc scal þat soekja20 sem
aðra þings-afglaopon.

35. Þess er laogsaogo-maðr scyldr, at segja aollom, þeim es hann
spyrja [1222], laogmál bæðe her oc heima: enda [1223] es-at hann
framarr scyldr sac-ráða við menn.

36. Hann scal oc upp segja þing-scaop hvert sumar, oc aðra þaótto
alla, svá at þeir verðe upp sagðer á þrimr sumrom hverjom, ef meire
hlutr manna vill hlýtt hafa.5

37. Faosto-dag enn fyrra í þinge scal þing-scaop ofallt upp segja,
ef menn hafa tóm til at hlýða.

38. Þat varðar allt þriggja marca út-legð laogsaogo-manne, ef
hann leyser eige af hende þau scil aoll es hann es scyldr til,
at nauðsynja-lauso; oc á sá maðr þá út-legð halfa es soeker, en10
halfa dómendr.

39. En ef laogsaogo-maðr goer þau ofiaot noccor, es meire hlutr manna
vill calla þings-afglaopon, oc varðar hónom þat fiorbaugs-garð.

40. Þat es oc, at á því eino vár-þinge á hann út-legðer, es hann15
heyr sialfr.





The Law-Court Section.


1. A law-court shall we also have and hold every summer at the
All-moot, and it shall sit ever in the place where it hath long been.

2. There shall be three raised places or daïses about the law-court,
so broad that there be room on each of them for four twelves of men.

There are twelve men out of each Quarter that have seats in the
law-court, and the law-speaker also, that laws and licences may be
decided. They shall all sit on the mid-benches, and there also our
bishops have their places.

3. Those twelve men out of the North-lander's Quarter have seats in
the law-court that held the twelve gode-hoods that were held there
when there were four moots there and three gode-hoods in each moot.

4. But in all the other Quarters those nine men have seats in the
law-court out of each Quarter that held the full and old gode-hoods
which there were when there were three in every spring-moot, and three
moots in each of these three Quarters. And they shall all have with
them one man out of each of the old moots, so that there shall be
twelve men with seats in the law-court out of each Quarter; but the
old gode-hoods of the North-landers are all minished by a fourth at
the naming to the All-moot, in comparison to the other full gode-hoods
here in the land.

5. That is also [law] as to all them that have seats in the law-court
as hath now been particularly said, that each of them ought to take
two men into the law-court from among his moot-men, to take counsel
with him, the one before him and the other at his back. Then the daïses
are made up fully, and there be four twelves of men on each daïs.

6. No man shall sit inside the daïses when the law-court is cleared,
save they that have cases: and they shall sit even in the midst
thereof, and the law-speaker shall give them place there. Outside of
the daïses the people ought to sit.

7. Only those men may lawfully stand up at the law-court that are
dealing with law or licence, or pleading men's cases, and they that are
outside [i. e. on the back bench] of them that are come hither. Every
man that doth not so shall pay the outlaw-fine of three marks, and
he hath pursual that will.

8. And if men press greatly upon the law-court on purpose, or make a
riot there or a noise, so that men's speech be disturbed thereby, they
shall be fined at the rate of the lesser outlawry or life-ring-garth
for all disturbance of moot.

9. If men come to the law-court that have seats there, and others have
sat in their place, they shall claim their place, and the others are
free of amends if they go away then. But if they loiter on in spite of
him who hath claimed his seat, it is a fine of three marks. Then the
owner shall claim his seat with witnesses, and a fine at the rate of
the lesser outlawry or life-ring-garth, if it be refused then. These
are all cases for summons [actionable], and there shall be called
an inquest of nine men, neighbours of him that is sued for a case of
lesser outlawry, and five for the outlaw-fine.

10. It shall be also that the law-court shall go forth both Lord's-days
in the moot, and the moot-breaking-day, and ever between these days
when the law-speaker will, or the more part of men, and every time
when men wish to clear the law-court.

11. There shall men righten the laws and make novellae.

12. There shall men pray for all licences for amendment of penalty,
and accord licences for all them that shall pray for privileges,
and many other licences, as is set forth particularly in the laws.

13. Every licence asked for shall be regarded as granted which no man
that hath a seat in the law-court doth object to, and to which no
objection is made from outside the law-court. Every man that hath
a seat in the law-court shall vote on every licence yea or nay,
otherwise he must pay an outlaw-fine of three marks.

14. If men pray leave in the law-court when they be not entirely come
or have gone away that have seats at the law-court, and yet there be
four twelves of men or more, then the law-speaker may fill the places
of those men withal until the seats be full, and he that refuseth this
shall be fined. And so the mid-daïs shall be made full. Then shall the
law-speaker name witnesses to himself, and by their witness he shall
declare, 'All these sit in the law-court by my rede, and are entitled
of right to fulfil law and licences. I name this witness ... lawfully
for whomsoever may take advantage thereof.' And then all licences
shall be as good as if the godes were themselves sitting, and only
for him that sat in that seat before shall any man be bound to rise.

15. This shall also be that the laws of the land here shall be as they
stand in the scrolls, and if the scrolls differ then that shall hold
that standeth in the scrolls that the bishops have. And if now these
scrolls differ, then that shall carry the day that saith more fully the
words that bear upon the case; but if they speak at the same length,
but each his own way, that which is in Scal-holt shall carry the case.

16. All that shall hold that is found in the scroll that Haf-lide had
made, save there be somewhat of it repealed since; but only that of
other law-men's rulings which doth not contradict it; and all that
shall hold which is left out in that one, or is more clear in them.

17. Now if men differ on a case of law, then the law-court may be
cleared upon it, if the scrolls do not settle it.

18. And then shall men summon with witnesses all the godes and the
law-speaker to the law-hill to go to the law-court and to their seats
to interpret the case of law as it shall be from henceforward. 'I
bid a law-bidding,' shall he say that will have the case tried.

19. If there be any men that have seats [there], and will not go to
their place when they know that the law-court shall be cleared, they
shall pay a life-ring-garth fine, as for other disturbance of moot;
and it is right to claim of every gode an outlaw-fine of three marks,
and that he go out of his gode-hood. And just the same shall all they
that have seats in the law-court be bound to perform there that which
they are bound to by law in the courts of law.

20. As soon as the godes have come into their seats each one of them
shall set [one of his] men on the daïs before him, and another on
the outside daïs at his back, to take counsel with them.

Then shall those men that have a case set forth particularly the law
case that there is a difference on, and say thereon what is at issue
between them.

Then afterwards men ought to plead their case till they have spoken
their opinion of the matter.

And afterwards they shall enquire of all the law-court-men that sit
on the mid-daïs to declare what each one of them wishes to be the
law in the case.

Then each gode shall say what the law should declare, and with whom
they will side in this case, and the more part shall have its way;
but if there be as many law-court-men on each side declaring the
several ways they would have the laws decide it, then they with whom
the law-speaker shall side shall carry their case.

21. But if the other are the more part they shall have their way,
and on each side they shall take an oath of impugnment, and avouch
in their oath that they think that to be law in the case which they
have upheld, and set forth solemnly why it is law.

22. Now if any law-court-man be sick or wounded so that he may not
be out of doors, then shall they both seek his vote in his booth,
and tell him what is the issue between them, and he shall take an
oath like the rest, and set forth solemnly what side he would take.

23. But if any law-court-man that is needed for such a matter be
speechless or witless or dead, then shall he be put in his place that
ought to take up his jurisdiction if he were dead or gone.

24. Now the law-court-men declare their minds, and should there be
twelve or more that are on the lesser side, then shall they who are
the fewer take an oath concerning their case. Then shall they who have
the greater side be bound also to take an oath concerning the case,
so that they do swear, in a majority of one or two at least, if the
law-speaker be on the lesser company. And if there be a contention
among them on the greater side, then shall they cast lots among them,
save they all be willing to swear.

25. Now if they be less than twelve that have the lesser side,
then they have forthwith lost their case: and then no men out of the
greater side are bound to take an oath against the oaths of them that
are fewer than twelve together.

26. If there be any law-court-men that will not take part with either
side, or perform their other duties in the case, for any such thing
they shall be fined as is set forth particularly above, and they shall
have the pursual that have a case, or that would fain come to fuller
law. But if neither will take action, then he hath the pursual that
will, and the law-speaker shall fill the places of those men that do
not do their law duties, and take men out of the Spring-moot wherein
that disturber of the law come, and he shall pay the life-ring-garth
fine that refuseth to do his duty. And if the law-speaker knoweth no
man in that company [fit for that purpose], then he shall beg the gode
of the same moot as the man that refused his duties to get him a man
in his place, so that there may be a full law-court, and he that will
not do this shall pay just such a fine as he that did the disturbance.

27. Now if no gode of the same moot will do anything, then he shall
get him a man out of another moot, and in a second or third if none
can be done otherwise. And they have as great a vote that stand
[for others] in this way as the other law-court-men.

28. It shall be also that one man shall recount particularly with
witnesses the law that hath gotten the better, and all the others shall
give their assent thereto. Then it shall be said over at the law-hill.

29. It is also the bounden duty of all men that have seats in
the law-court always to fill up that which is said over, when the
law-speaker says over the law, whether it be at the law-hill or in
the law-court, or though it be in the church when the weather is
uncomfortable out of doors.

30. And if certain law-court-men have not leisure for this, then shall
those two men that are taken to this end by them to sit in the daïs
in the law-court listen to the saying over of the law in the stead
of each.

31. Now if neither of these give heed thereto, then shall the vote
of them and the law-court-men that appointed them not stand that
same summer....

32. When there is any contention upon some point of law that hath
been said over, there is an outlaw-fine of three marks, and the
other law-court-men shall have the pursual and shall summon them at
the law-hill, and call on a quest of five neighbours of him that the
action is against.

33. And the law-speaker hath to marshal men at the law-hill, and
he oweth an outlaw-fine of three marks that shall sit there without
his leave.

34. Now if men offer to disturb the law-speaker, not to let him take
his seat, or them that he hath named to sit at the law-hill with him,
there shall be paid the life-ring-garth fine, and the offenders shall
be sued like other disturbers of moots.

35. The law-speaker is bound to this--to say to all them that require
of him the law case [i.e. what the law says] both here and at home,
but he is not bound to mix himself up any further in men's cases.

36. He must also say over the Moot-making Section every summer, and
all the other Sections, so that they be said over every three summers,
if the greater part of the people will hearken thereto.

37. The first fast-day [Friday] of the Moot the whole Moot-making
Section shall be all said over if men have leisure to hearken thereto.

38. There is an outlaw-fine of three marks for all this on the
law-speaker whenever he falls short in his necessary work; and the
man that pursues the suit and the dooms-men half.

39. But if the law-speaker acteth so unfitly that the greater part
of men shall declare it to be disturbance of court, he shall pay a
life-ring-garth fine.

40. It shall be also that he take the fines only at the spring-moot
for the cases he heareth himself.





Laogsaogo-mannz Þóttr.

1. Svá es enn mælt, at sá maðr scal vesa noccor ofallt á lande óro es
scyldr sé til þess at segja laog maonnom, oc heiter sá laogsaogo-maðr.

2. En ef laogsaogo-mannz misser við, þá scal or þeim fiórðunge20
taca mann til at segja þing-scaop upp et næsta sumar, es hann hafðe
síðarst heimile í.

Menn scolo þá taca ser laogsaogo-mann oc sýsla þat faosto-dag hverr
vesa scal, áðr sacar sé lýstar.

3. Þat es oc vel, ef aller menn verða sátter á einn mann; en ef
laogrétto-maðr noccorr stendr við því es flester vilja, oc scal þá
hluta í hvern fiórðung laog-saga scal hverfa. En þeir fiórðungs-menn5
es þá hefer hlutr í hag boreð, scolo taca laogsaogo-mann þann sem
þeir verða sátter á, hvárt sem sá es or þeirra fiórðunge eða or aoðrom
fiórðunge noccorom þeirra manna es þeir mego þat geta at.

4. Nú verða fiórðungs-menn eige á sátter, oc scal þá afl ráða með
þeim. En ef þeir ero iam-marger es laogrétto-seto eigo10 es sínn
laogsaogo-mann vilja hvárer, þá scolo þeir ráða es byscop sá fellr í
fullting með es í þeim fiórðunge es. Nú ero laogrétto-menn noccorer
þeir es níta því es aðrer vilja, fáe enge mann sialfer til laogsaogo,
oc eigo enscis þeirra orð at metasc.

5. Laogsaogo-mann á í laogrétto at taca þá es menn hafa ráðet15 hverr
vesa scal, oc scal einn maðr scilja fyrer, en aðrer gialda sam-kvæðe á:

Oc scal þriú sumar sam-fast enn same hafa, nema menn vile eige
breytt hafa.

6. Or þeirre laogrétto es laogsaogo-maðr es tecenn, scolo menn20 ganga
til Laogbergs, oc scal hann ganga til Laogbergs, oc setjasc í rúm sítt,
oc scipa Laogberg þeim maonnom sem hann vill, en menn scolo þá mæla
maólom sínom.

7. Þat es oc mælt, at laogsaogo-maðr es scyldr till þess at segja
upp Laog-þaótto alla á þrimr sumrom hverjom: en Þing-scaop hvert sumar.

8. Laogsaogo-maðr á upp at segja sycno-leyfe aoll at Laogberge svá
at meire hlutr manna sé þar, ef því um náer, oc misseres-tal, oc svá
þat ef menn scolo coma fyrr til Alþingess an tio vicor ero5 af sumre:
oc tína Imbro-daga hald, oc Faosto-í-ganga: oc scal hann þetta allt
mæla at þing-lausnom.

9. Þat es oc, at laogsaogo-maðr scal svá gerla þaótto alla upp segja,
at enge vite einna micloge goerr. En ef hónom vinsc eige fróðleicr
til þess, þá scal hann eiga stefno við fimm laogmenn10 en næsto doegr
áðr, eða fleire, þá es hann má hellzt geta af, áðr hann sege hvern
þaótt upp:

Oc verðr hverr maðr útlagr þrimr maorcom es ólofat gengr á mál þeirra:
oc á laogsaogo-maðr saoc þá.

10. Laogsaogo-maðr scal hafa hvert sumar tvau hundroð alna15 vaðmála
af laogrétto fiaóm fyrer starf sítt. Hann á oc útlegðer allar halfar
þær es á Alþinge ero doemðar her: oc scal doema ein­daga á þeim aollom
annat sumar her í buanda-kirkjo-garðe Mið­vico-dag í mitt þing. Útlagr
es hverr maðr þrimr maorcom es fé lætr doema, ef hann seger eige
laogsaogo-manne til, oc svá hverer20 dóms upp-saogo-váttar hafa veret.

11. Þat es oc þá es laogsaogo-maðr hefer haft þriú sumor laogsaogo,
oc scal hann þá segja upp Þing-scaop et fiórða sumar Faosto-dag enn
fyrra í þinge: þá es hann oc lauss frá laogsaogo af hann vill.

12. Nú vill hann hafa laogsaogo lengr, ef aðrer unna hónom, þá scal
enn meire hlutr laogrétto-manna ráða.

13. Þat es oc, at laogsaogo-maðr es útlagr þrimr maorcom ef hann coemr
eige til Alþingess Faosto-dag enn fyrra, áðr menn gange til laogbergs,
at nauðsynja-lauso: enda eigo menn þá at taca annan5 laogsaogo-mann
ef vilja.





The Law-Speaker Section.

1. It is further spoken that there shall be always in our land a
certain man that shall be bound to this, to speak the law to men;
and he is called the Law-Speaker.

2. But if a law-speaker should be missing [i.e. by death or other
accident], then shall a man be taken to say over the Moot-making
Section the next summer out of that Quarter where he had his domicile
last.

Men shall take to them a law-speaker, and settle upon whom it shall
be on the fast-day [Friday] before the cases are opened.

3. It is also well if all men are agreed on one man; but if any
law-court-man withstand him whom most men wish for, then shall lots be
cast to see to what Quarter the law-speaking is to go. And the men of
that Quarter to whom the lot has fallen shall take that law-speaker
whom they be agreed on, whether he be out of that Quarter, or any
one of the men of any other Quarter whom they may find to take it.

4. Now if the men of the Quarter do not all agree, then the more part
shall decide with them; but if they that have seats in the law-court be
in equal numbers, each side wishing to have their man as law-speaker,
then they shall have their way whom the bishop of that Quarter shall
agree with. Now if there be any law-court-men that withstand what the
others wish, but put forth no man themselves for the law-speaking,
then is their vote to be held of no account.

5. The law-speaker must be appointed in the law-court when men have
agreed upon whom he shall be, and one man shall speak the formula
for the rest, and the others shall yield unanimous consent thereto;
and he shall hold the same three summers running and no more, unless
men will not have a change.

6. Men shall go out of the law-court to the law-hill when the
law-speaker is appointed, and he shall go to the law-hill and sit
in his place, and marshal the law-hill to such men as he will, and
there men shall plead their cases.

7. It is further spoken that the law-speaker is bound to this--to say
over all the Sections of the law in the course of his three summers,
but the Moot-making Section every summer.

8. The law-speaker ought to say over all the inlawries or licences
at the law-hill, so that the greater part of men be there [present]
if so it may be, and the reckoning of the seasons [i.e. Calendar];
and also this, whether men must come to the All-moot before ten weeks
of the summer be gone; and set forth the [time for the] keeping of
the Ember days, and the beginning of the fast [Lent], and all this
he must speak at the breaking up of the moot.

9. It is also [right] that the law-speaker shall say over all the
Sections so thoroughly that no man may know it more thoroughly; but
if he have not got the knowledge for this, then he must hold meetings
with five law-men or more the next day before, of whom he may the best
get the knowledge before he shall say over that particular Section.

And every man must pay three marks that without leave comes into their
counsel, and the law-speaker shall have the soc [right of pursual].

10. The law-speaker shall have every summer 200 ells of wadmal out of
the law-court money for his trouble. He hath also the half of all the
fines that are adjudged at the All-moot; and the set pay-day for all
[fines] shall be the summer after, here in the franklin's churchyard,
mid-week day [Wednesday] in mid-moot; and every man shall be fined
three marks that hath to pay a fine if he do not tell the law-speaker
thereof, and also who have been the witnesses of the payment.

11. It is [right] also, when the law-speaker hath had the law-speaking
three summers, then shall he say over the Moot-making [Section] the
fourth summer on the first fast-day [Friday] of the moot, and then
he is free from the law-speaking if he choose.

12. But if he wish to keep the law-speaking longer, if the others
allow him, then the more part of the law-court-men shall decide.

13. It is [right] also that the law-speaker be fined three marks if
he come not to All-moot the first fast-day [Friday] before men go to
law-hill save for lawful and necessary impediment; and then men may
take another law-speaker if they will.





Þingscapa Þóttr (Cd. Reg.).


Þat es mælt í laogom órom, at ver scolom fióra eiga fiórðungs-dóma.

Skal goðe hverr nefna mann í dóm es fornt goðorð hefer oc fullt: en
þau ero full goðorð oc forn, es þing vóro þriú í fiórðunge10 hverjom,
en goðar þrír í þinge hverjo: þá vóro þing ó-sliten.

Ef goðorð ero smæra deilð, oc scolo þeir svá til scifta, es hlut
hafa af fornom goðorðom, at svá sé nefnt sem nú es taleð. Þá ero
fiórðungs-dómar fuller.

Þat es mælt; at dómar scolo í dag vesa nefnder eða ráðner:15 scal goðe
hverr nefna sínn þriðiungs-mann í dóm, nema hann hafe laogrétto-manna
lof til annars.

Scal carl-mann tolf vetra gamlan eða ellra nefna í dóm, þann es fyrer
orðe eða eiðe cann at ráða, friálsan mann oc heimiles-fastan.20

Þann mann scal eige nefna í dóm es sócnar-aðile es, eða varnar-aðile,
eða hann hefer saoc hand-selða, eða vaorn hand-selða svá at nú sé
búen til þings.

Þann mann scal eige í dóm nefna, es eige hefer mál numet í barn-oesco
á Dansca Tungo, eðr [1224] hann hefer veret þriá vetr á Íslande
eða lengr.

Ef sá lætr í dóm nefnasc es nú vas frá sciliðr, eða selr hann aoðrom
manne saocena, af þvi at hann vill láta í dóm nefnasc, oc5 verðr hann
útlagr um þat þrimr maorcom, oc ónýt maól hans, sócner eða varner,
ef hann átte, nema hann gete þann kvið, at hann visse eige, at sacar
vóro búnar á haond hónom.

Ef goðe nefner þann mann í dóm, es frá vas sciliðr, eða nefner í annan
dóm an hann hafe hloteð, oc es hann útlagr um þat hvárt-tveggja10
þrimr maorcom, oc or goðorðe, nema hann gete þann kvið, at hann visse
eige at hinn hefðe saoc eða vaorn hand-selða, eða hann vere sócnar
aðile eða varnar.

At Laogberge scal stefna goðanom, oc kveðja heimiles-búa hans, oc á
hverr at soekja þá saoc es vill.15

Goðe scal ganga í hamra-scarð, oc setja niðr þar dómanda sínn, ef
hann vill dóm nefna; oc nefna ser vátta tvá eða fleire, 'nefne ec
[N. N. oc M. M.] í þat vætte, at ec nefne þenna þegn í dóm' oc nefna
hinn á nafn 'at doema um sacar þær allar es her coma í dóm þenna,
oc laog scylda hann til um at doema; oc býð-ec til sacar-soekjanda20
oc sacar-verjanda at ryðja dóm þenna; oc ann-ec hónom íseto í dóme,
nema laog-rengð rétt come til, þá fæ-ec annan réttan í stað hans, ef
hann es or numenn at laogom'--oc kveða á í hvern dóm hann nefner--'oc
nefne-ec laog-dóm.'

Dómar scolo út fara Þvátt-dag; oc vesa úte til hruðningar unz sól
coemr á Þingvaoll Dróttins-dag.

Ef þá má eige ganga þurrt í holmenn.... [1225]5



Menn scolo í dag oc á morgin lýsa sacar þær allar es til fiórðungs
dóms scal: enda es iamn-rétt at lýsa annan dag vico, ef menn vilja
þat í þing-scaopom hafa.

Oc svá ef menn vilja lýsa um tiundar maól, þeir menn es til þeirrar
sócnar ero tecner, eða aðilja ero, eða þeir es af þeim hafa10 tecet,
þá scolo þeir menn eige hafa síðarr lýst an nú es taleð.

En aðrer menn eigo at lýsa um tiundar-maól unz dómar fara út.

Ef maðr vill lýsa saoc á haond manne, hann scal nefna ser vátta þriá
[1226] eða fleire: 'nefne-ec í þat vætte [N. N. oc M. M.], at ec lýse
saoc á haond hónom'--oc nefna hinn á nafn,--oc kveða á saocena,15 oc
svá hvat hann telr hónom varða.

Hann scal lýsa at Laogberge svá at meire hlutr manna sé hiá, oc
laogsaogo-maðr; oc lýsa laog-lýsing; oc hand-selða saoc, ef svá es;
oc lýsa til fiórðungs-dóms. Geta scal þess ef sú es saoc es hann
lýste fyrra sumar.20



Menn eigo at spyrja at þing-feste manna, þeirra es menn vilja soekja
her á þinge; oc spyrja í dag, eða á morgin, ef menn vilja dóm ryðja:
enda es rétt at spyrja unz dómar fara út til sócnar.

Sá maðr es hann vill vita þing-vist annars, hann scal nefna ser vátta,
'nefne-ec [N. N.] í þat vette,' scal hann kveða, 'at ec spyrr boendr
alla í heyranda hlióðe at Laogberge, hverr laog-grið hafe5 hand-salat
N. N.; es mec þat under frétt þeirre, at ec vil vita hverja búa
ec scal kveðja til sacar þeirrar es ec hefe haofðað á haond hónom:
spyr ec laog-spurning.' Hann scal nefna vátta at svaorom þeim es verða.

Ef maðr gengr við heimiles-fange þess mannz es hann spurðe at,10 oc
svá þótt enge gange við: hann scal enn nefna vátta [N. N. oc M. M.],
í þat vette, 'at ec spyr goða alla í heyranda hlióðe at Laogberge,
hverr ser kenne N. N. at þing-manne eða þriðiungs-manne: es mic þat
under frétt þesse, at ec vil vita í hvern fiórðungs-dóm es scal soekja
saoc á haond hónom: spyr ec laog-spurning.' Hann15 scal nefna vátta
at svaorom þeim es verða.

En ef maðr gengr við þing-feste þess mannz es at vas spurt, þá á
hann at segja í þann dóm saoc sína es sá goðe es í fiórðunge es í
gegn gecc þing-feste hans.

Hann á þann goða at kveðja tylftar-kviðar [1227], ef sú saoc es,
es20 tylftar-kviðr coemr til: þó es rétt at hann spyre hann sialfan
at grið-fange síno oc þing-vist sínne, oc verðr þat iamn-fullt sem
þá es goðe gengr við þing-feste hans.

Rétt es at goðe gange við þing-feste hans, meðan eige ero hlutaðar
fram-saogor saca, enda sé eige áðr cvatt tylftar-kviðar [1228]: enda
es iamn-rétt at ganga við þing-feste mannz með vátta, þó at eige sé
at5 Laogberge, ef hann fiðr hinn sialfan....



Goðar aller scolo coma til þings v dag vico es tio vicor ero af sumre,
áðr sól gange af Þing-velle. En ef þeir coma eige svá, þá ero þeir
útlager, oc af goðorðe síno, nema nauðsynjar bere til, ef þeir coma
eige. Sam-þings-goðar eigo at ráða því hverr með10 goðorð scal fara
oc upp taca, þriðiungs-manna þess goða es heima sitr.

Þing-heyiendr scolo coma enn v dag vico til þings, oc fara til búðar
með þeim goða, es þeir ero í þinge með, oc scal hverr þeirra hafa
tiald um þvera búð. Þá scal hverr þeirra taca ping-farar-caup15 en
gialda eige: enda es hverr-þeirra þing-heyiande bæðe um sín maól oc
annarra manna.

Goðenn es þá scyldr at fá hónom búðar-rúm: ef hann fær hónom eige, oc
varðar þing-mannenom eige við laog, at hann fare til annarrar búðar,
oc á hann þó at heimta ping-farar-caupet.20

Nú coemr maðr eige til aondorz [1229] þings, enda come hann
Dróttens-dagenn fyrra í þinge, oc es sá þó þing-heyiande,
bæðe um sín maól oc annarra manna; oc scal hann eige gialda
þing-farar-caup, enda scal hann eige taca; oc scal hann eige fara
af þinge fyrer þing-lausner, nema lofat sé: ef hann ferr oc varðar
hónom fiorbaugs-garð. Rétt es at hann tace þing-farar-caup, ef hann
gengr í dóma5 eða berr kviðo.

Rétt es at nefna þá menn í dóm, es til þings coma fyrr an dómar
sé nefnder.

Þeir menn aller es sacar hafa at soekja eða verja, eða menn ero
kvadder þing-farar, at [1230] þeir scolo coma Dróttens-dag enn fyrra
í10 þinge: ef þeir coma eige svá, þá ero ónýtar sacar þeirra, oc svá
varner þær es þeir bera framm: enda virðasc einscis vætte þau es þeir
bera, ef þeir vóro heiman kvadder.

Ef maðr coemr síðarr an Dróttens-dag enn fyrra í þinge, oc es sá eige
þing-heyiande, hvártke um sín maól né annarra manna, oc15 scal hann
ríða af þinge þá es hann vill; oc scal hann gialda þing-farar-caup
en eige taca.

Menn scolo svá gialda þing-farar-caup sem þeir ero á sátter í þriðiunge
hverjom við goðann.

Þing-heyendr scolo eige vesa um nótt af þinge eða lengr: þá20 ero
þeir af þinge es þeir ero or þing-marce. Fara eigo menn um daga at
leita hrossa sínna, svá at eige dvele þat gaogn fyrer maon­nom,
eða dóm-nefno fyrer goðom, ef hann vill þá í dóm nefna, eða hafa
þá í noccorom laog-scilom með ser. En ef þeir fara, oc es þat
þings-afglaopon oc varðar f. b. g.

Boendr ero þing-heyiendr, oc goðar; oc þeir menn es þing-farar oc
gagna ero heiman kvadder.

Ef þing-heyiendr fara eige til búðar með goða þeim es þeir ero í5
þinge með, oc vill goðenn soekja þá um, oc scal hann stefna hónom at
Laogberge, oc láta varða þriggja marca útlegð, oc stefna þar til dóms.

Ef hinn ræðr at hlaupa or þriðiunge goðans fyrer þat es hann vas sóttr,
þá varðar hónom þriggja marca secð við goðann, oc scal þeirre saoc
stefna heiman, oc kveðja heimiles-búa fimm á þinge10 þess mannz es
sóttr es, hvárt sem hann foere af því á braut eða eige.



Ver scolom fara til Laogbergs á morgin, oc foera dóma út til hruðningar
svá et síðarsta at sól sé á giá-hamre enom vestra or Laogsaogo-mannz
rúme at siá á Laogberge.

Laogsaogo-maðr scal fyrstr út ganga, ef hann hefer heilende til:15 þá
eigo goðar at ganga með dómendr sína ef þeim es meina-laust; ella scal
hverr þeirra geta mann fyrer sic. Þá scal goðe setja niðr dómanda sínn,
oc scal hvers þeirra for-ráð iamn-rétt es þá es til tecenn.

Laogsaogo-maðr scal ráða oc at kveða hvar hverge dómr scal20 sitja,
oc scal laogsaogo-maðr láta hringja til dóma út-foerslo.

Þeim es rétt sacar at soekja oc verja, es þar ero comner Dróttens-dag
enn fyrra í þinge, en oengom þeim es síðarr coemr: nema þeir atburðer
verðe, at sacar goerðesc svá síðarliga eða upp cveme, at þeir mætte
eige comasc fyrr til þings an efter Dróttens-dagenn: oc verða þeir
menn þó saca soekjendr oc þing-heyiendr um þau maól aoll es þeir haofðo
með at fara, ef þeir cvómo svá snimma, at5 gagna [1231] mætte fyrr til
kveðja an dómar foere út: þeir eigo eige dóma at ryðja um sín maól....



... Þá scal goðenn ganga út oc nefna mann í dóm, oc scal hafa nefndan
áðr sól come á Þing-vaoll, ef ráð-rúm es at því ...

Ef goðenn viðr eigi dóm fullan áðr sól come á Þing-vaoll þá es10 hann
útlagr oc or goðorðe: oc svá ef hann nefner annan í dóm an hann eige,
þá á dómr at doema um sacar allar sem fullr sé dómrenn.

Eige scal dóm ryðja lengr an sól come á Þing-vaoll.

Sá scal soekja goðann, es sótt vill hafa, til fullra laga, þeirra
manna es sacar hafa í dóm þann: en ef þeir bregðasc um, þá15 scolo
þeir hluta með ser, oc scal sá soekja es hlýtr.



Maðr scal cuatt hafa váttorða allra oc frum-cviða þeirra es saoc hans
eigo at fylga, áðr dómr fare út.

Rétt es at cveðja xiiar cviða áðr dómr fare út, oc svá at dóme.

Þá es rétt cuatt, ef hann heyrer sialfr á, eða at rúme hans; ella20
svá at búðu-nautar hans heyre.

Þar es maðr vill cueðja xii kviðar, hann scal nefna ser vátta [N. N. oc
M. M.], 'at því vette' (scal hann cueða) 'at ec spyr þic at því'
(oc nefna goðann) 'ef þu hefer goðorð fullt, at þú nefner dóma fulla
með; oc berr xii cuiðo: spyr-ec laog-spurning.'

Ef hann læzc hafa, oc scal hann nefna vátta at svaorom hans, 'oc5 at
því vætte' (scal hann cueða), 'at ec cueð þic xii kviðar' (oc nefna
goðann, oc cueða á hvat hann cueðr hann), 'oc bera með þriðiungs-menn
þína ellefo, en þú ser sialfr enn tolfte: cueð ec laog-cuaoð.'



Þar es maðr vill cueðja búa-cuiðar, hann scal ganga þangat til10
búðar es sá maðr es í es hann vill cvaddan hafa, oc es hónom rétt at
cveðja þar es hinn heyrer sialfr á: enda es hónom rétt at cveðja at
rúme hins es hann vill cvaddan hafa, svá at þar heyre búðo-nautar.

Ef maðr veit eige hvárt hinn es búande eða grið-maðr, es hann15
vill cvaddan hafa, oc á hann at spyrja hinn með vátta, hvárt hann
sé buande eða grið-maðr, oc segja hvat hónom es under frétt­enne;
oc spyrja laog-spurning, oc nefna vátta at svaorom þeim es verða.

Ef hann vill þann mann cveðja es þing-heyjande es, fyrer bú20 annars
mannz, oc á hann at spyrja með vátta, ef hann veit eige áðr, hvárt
hann eige þar laog-heimile eða eige; eða sé hann þing-heyjande fyrer
bú þess mannz, oc nefna búandann. Hann scal svá goera um cvaoð við
hann sem hinn svarar hónom es spurðr es.

Ef sá vill ecci til segja es spurðr es, eða lýgr hann til, oc verðr
hann secr um þat þrimr maorcom, oc á sá saoc við hann es hann spurðe,
eða búe sá es cvaddr es í stað hans, ef hinn vill eige saoc5 hafa. Saoc
þeirre scal stefna at Laogberge, oc cveðja til heimilis-búa hins fimm
es sóttr es.

Ef maðr cveðr grið-menn, oc hugðe hann at búande være, eða cveðr hann
þann grið-mann fyrir annars mannz bú, es eigi átte þar laog-heimile,
oc verðr hónom rétt sú cvaoð, þótt menn vile á10 leita við hann,
hvar-vetna þess es hann getr þann cvið, at hann cvadde þá es hann
hugðe at réttaster være, enda átte hann eige cost at spyrja.

Ef maðr cveðr grið-menn búa-cviðar, eða þann fyrer bú mannz es eige
es þing-heyjande, oc cveðe hann svá, at þeir heyre á sialfer á15
cvaoð hans, oc eige hann cost at spyrja laog-fréttar ef hann vill,
oc ónýter hann þá málet fyrer ser, þar bergsc hann við biarg-cviðenn,
es hann cvadde þá svá, at þeir heyrðo eige á.



Dóma-út-foerslor.--Dómar scolo fara út þann dag es menn cveða á,
oc eige síðarr an sól coemr á giá-bacca enn hærra frá Laog-berge20
or laogsaogo-mannz rúme at siá. Þá es laogsaoo-maðr oc goðar aller
scyllder til at ganga út með dómendr sína, oc svá þeir menn es með
sacar fara.

Sá maðr es með saoc ferr, þá verðr hann útlagr, ef hann gengr með
fleire menn an tio til dóms.

Ef sá maðr coemr eige út es saoc hefer at soekja, þá es sól es comen
á giá-bacca enn vestra or laogsaogo-mannz rúme at siá, oc verðr
hann secr um þat þrimr maorcom, oc á sá saoc es hann hefer5 mál á
haondom. Scal saoc þeirre stefna at Laogberge, oc cveðja heimilis-búa
fimm þess mannz es sóttr es, ef hann getr þann cvið, at hann moende
fyrr út coma, ef sól um sæe, oc versc hann þá saocenne [1232].



Ef sex dómendr ero comner út eða fleire; at þat es rétt þeim10 manne
es með sacar ferr at bióða til hlut-falla at dóme þeim maonnom aollom
es sacar hafa í dóm þann, oc cueða á stað þann es þeir scolo hluta
fram-saogor með ser. Hverr maðr þeirra es saoc hefer með at fara í
dóm, þá scal hlut bera í scaut einn þótt hann hafe fleire sacar í
dóm þann.15

Hverr maðr scal merkja hlut sínn, oc bera alla saman í scaut, oc scal
maðr taca fióra hlute senn upp.

Þeir scolo fyrst segja sacar sínar framm sem hlióta, svá hverr at
aoðrom sem hloteð hafa.

Nú coma sumer eige til hlut-fallzens, þá scolo þeir síðarst framm20
segja.

Þat es oc rétt at annarr maðr bere hlut hans í scaut, oc scal þá at
þeirra hluton framm segja: þær sacar scal eige hluta es eige varð fyrra
sumar um doemt; ef þær ero eige fleire an fiórar, enda eige fære. Þá
scolo þeir hluta með ser sacarnar, ef þær ero fleire an fiórar. Þær
scal allar fyrstar segja framm; en þær sacar næst es her hafa goersc
á þinge.5

Ef sá verðr eige búenn til es fyrstr hefer hloteð, þá scal sá biðja
lofs til, es síðarr hefer hloteð, at segja saoc sína fyrre framm; en
hann scal lofa hónom: en ef hann lofar hónom eige, þá es hónom rétt
at segja saoc sína framm, ef hinn es eige til búenn, ef dómendr lofa.

Sá maðr scal nefna ser vátta ... See the translation.10

Hann scal vinna eið at því ... See the translation.





The Moot-making Section.

It is spoken in our laws that we shall have four Quarter-courts. Each
gode that hath an ancient and full gode-hood shall name a man to the
doom-court. And they are full gode-hoods and ancient, when there were
three moots in each Quarter, and three godes in each moot; when the
moots were not divided.

If the gode-hoods are parted into pieces, then shall they that have
the shares of the old gode-hood so act, that a man be named as was
lately spoken. Then the Quarter-doom-courts shall be full.

It is spoken that the courts shall be named on an appointed day [the
first Friday of the moot]. Every gode shall name a man of his own
trithing to the court, save he have the leave of the law-court-men
to take another.

A man must be twelve winters old or older to be named to the court,
that can give his word or take his oath, a freeman and hearth-fast.

The man shall not be named to the court that is the pursuer or
defender, or hath had that pursual handselled to him or that defence
handselled to him, which is now ready for this moot.

The man shall not be named to the court who hath not learnt his speech
in his childhood in the Danish tongue, or hath not been three winters
in Iceland or longer.

If a man allow himself to be named to the court that hath now been
excepted, or handsel his case to another because he wisheth to be
named to this court, he shall pay an outlaw-fine of three marks, and
his suit shall be invalid, be it pursual or defence that he hath,
except he can get a verdict that he knew not that cases were ready
to be brought that touch him.

If a gode name a man to court that is excepted therefrom, or name
him to another court than is his, then he shall pay an outlaw-fine
of three marks for each [of these cases], and shall be [put] out of
his godehood, save he get a verdict that he knew not that he had a
case or defence handselled, or that he were pursuer or defender....

At the law-hill the godes are to be summoned and his neighbours'-quest
be called, and any man that will may pursue the suit.

The gode shall go to the cleft of the rock and set down his dooms-man
there, if he wish to name doom-court, and name to him witnesses,
two or more--

'I name N. N. and M. M. as witness herein that I name this thane to
court, and name him by name O. O. to doom all the cases that come here
in this court, and which the laws bind him to doom, and I call on the
pursuer of the case and the defender of this case to challenge this
doom-court. And I grant him to sit in court, save lawful challenge
stand in the way, and then I shall put another right man in his stead,
if he be lawfully taken out,' and he shall now say what doom-court
he names him to, 'and I name a lawful doom-court.'

The courts shall go forth on Saturday, and be out for challenge until
the sun come over the Tingwald [9 a.m.] on the Lord's-day.

If one may not go out dryshod to the holm [the apodosis is missing].


Of Notice of Suits.

Men shall to-day and to-morrow [Friday or Saturday] give notice
of all cases that shall go to the Quarter-court, and it is just as
lawful to give notice of them the second day of the week [Monday]
if men will have it so in the Moot-setting Rules.

And so if men wish they that are appointed to sue or are the chief
suitors may give notice of a case on tithe-law, or that have taken
the suit from them, and these men shall not have longer time than is
now said. But other men ought to give notice of tithe-cases before
the courts go forth.

If a man wish to give notice of a case against a man he shall name to
himself three witnesses or more, 'I name in witness to this N. N. and
M. M., and I give notice of my case against him and name him by name
L. L.', and he shall declare his charge, and also what he reckoneth
he is liable to.

He must give notice at the law-hill when the more part of men and the
law-speaker be by, and give lawful notice, and handsel the case if
so he will; and give notice of the Quarter-court. And he must declare
whether the case were given notice of last summer.


Of enquiring for men's Moot-hold or curial domicile.

Men ought to enquire into the curial allegiance of men when they wish
to sue here at the moot, and enquire to-day [Friday] or to-morrow
[Saturday] if men wish to challenge the court, and it is lawful to
enquire until the courts go forth for the suits.

The man that will know the curial domicile of another, he must name
himself witnesses. 'I name N. N. in witness of this,' shall he declare,
'that I enquire of all the franklins within hearing of my voice at the
law-hill, who hath handselled M. M. legal asylum, and this is my reason
for the asking, that I wish to know what neighbours I shall call as
quest in this case that I have set up against him. I enquire with a
lawful enquiry.' He shall name witnesses to the answer that he may get.

If a man acknowledge giving a home to the man that is enquired after,
and even though no one acknowledge, he shall also name witnesses
N. N. and M. M., in witness of this, 'that I enquire of all the godes
within hearing of my voice at the law-hill, which of them acknowledge
O. O. as his moot-man or trithing's-man. And this is my reason for
the asking, that I wish to know in what Quarter-court I shall pursue
the suit against him. I enquire with a lawful enquiry,' He shall name
witnesses to the answer that he may get.

But if a man acknowledge the curial allegiance of the man that is
enquired after, then he ought to set forth his suit in that court which
belongs to the Quarter that the gode-hood belongs to who acknowledges
his curial allegiance.

He ought to summon this gode to a quest-of-twelve, if the case be one
in which a quest-of-twelve comes in. Yet it is lawful that he enquire
himself as to his grith-taking or receiving of asylum or his curial
domicile, and it is full as good as if the gode had acknowledged his
curial allegiance.

It is lawful that the gode acknowledge his curial allegiance,
while as yet they have not cast lots for the order of the cases,
and if the quest of twelve have not already been called. And it is
just as right to acknowledge a man's curial allegiance with witness,
though it be not at the hill of laws, if he meet him himself.


How the Gode shall come to the Moot.

All godes shall come to moot the fifth day [Thursday] of the week
when there are ten weeks of summer, before the sun goes off Tingwald
[c. 9 a.m.]. And if they do not come so they are under outlaw-fine
and out of their gode-hoods, unless there be some necessities for
their not coming. The godes of the same moot must agree which of the
men of the trithing shall bring up and carry out the gode-hood of
the gode that sits at home.

They that belong to the moot shall come on the fifth day of the week
[Thursday] to the moot, and go to the booth with the gode in whose moot
they are, and each of them shall have a tilt across the booth. Then
every one of them shall take moot-fare-pay, but not pay it, and each
of them is a full member of the moot both for his own case and that
of other men.

The gode is bound to give him booth-room. If he cannot, then the
moot-man is not liable to the laws. If he go to another booth, then
he ought still to have his share of the moot-fare-pay.

Now if a man come not to the beginning of the moot [Thursday, Friday,
Saturday], but cometh on the first Lord's-day of the moot, still
he is a full member of the moot, both for his own case and those
of other men; and he shall not pay moot-fare-pay nor receive it,
and he shall not go away from the moot before the moot-breaking save
leave be given him. If he go then he comes under the life-ring-garth
fine. It is lawful that he take moot-fare-pay if he go into a court
[as doomster] or giveth a quest-verdict.

It is right to name those men to the courts that come to the moot
before the courts be named.

All men that have suits to pursue or defend, or men that are
quest-summoned to moot, should come the first Lord's-day of the
moot. If they do not come so their cases are null, and their defences
likewise which they are sustaining, and no witness they bear is of
worth if they be summoned on quest from home.

If a man come later than the first Lord's-day of the moot then he
is no full member of the moot, neither for his own suit nor for the
suits of others, and he shall ride off the moot if he will, and he
shall pay the moot-fare-pay but not receive any.

Men shall pay the moot-fare-pay as they have agreed in each trithing
with the gode.

Members of the moot shall not be a night or longer off the moot. They
are off the moot when they are outside the moot-marks. Men may go by
day to look after their horses, but yet so that there be no delay in
men's law-business, or in naming courts before the godes, in case
he wish to name them to a court or to have them with him in any
law-dealings. And if they go they come under the life-ring-garth fine.

Franklins and godes are members of the moot, and those men are
moot-farers that are called as quest from home.

If a moot-member will not go to the booth of the gode that he is
in moot with, and the gode wish to sue him therefore, then he shall
summon him at the law-hill and let him pay three marks outlaw-fine,
and summon a court therefore.

If he doth run out of the trithing of a gode before he is sued, then
he must pay a convict-fine of three marks to the gode, and this suit
shall be summoned from the homestead, and a quest of five neighbours
called at the moot of the man that is sued whether he have gone abroad
out of it or no.


Of going to the Hill of Laws.

We shall go to the law-hill to-morrow [Saturday], and bring the courts
out for challenge at the latest when the sun is seen above the west
cliff of the ravine or geow [c. 5 p.m.], from the law-speaker's place
on the law-hill.

The law-speaker shall walk out first, if he have the health so to do,
then the godes with their doomsters ought to walk, if there be no
impediment to their so doing, and if so each shall get a man to act
for him.

Then the gode shall set down his doomsters, and each shall have just
the same power as he for whom he stands.

The law-speaker shall rule and give his decision where each court
shall sit, and the law-speaker shall have the bell rung for the going
forth of the courts.

They have the right to sue or defend that come here the first
Lord's-day of the moot, and none of them that come later, save this
have happened, that a deed was done so late or known so late that
they could not get to the moot before, until after the Lord's-day, and
these men shall have the pursual of their suits, and be full members
of the moot, for all the cases that they have to do with there if
they come early enough to set forth their quest-calling before the
courts go forth. They must not challenge the court in their own case.


Part of the Section on challenging the Court.

Then shall a gode go forth and name a man to court, and have him
named before the sun come on to the Tingwald, if there be....

If a gode cannot get a full court before the sun come on the Tingwald
[c. 9 a.m. Monday morning] then he is [under] outlaw-[fine] and out
of his gode-hood, and so if he names them into another court than his,
and the court must doom all cases as if it were full.

The court must not be challenged later than when the sun comes on
the Tingwald [9 a.m.].

He that will of them that have cases in this court shall sue the gode
to the full law, and if they contend over it then they shall cast lots
among themselves, and he upon whom the lot falleth shall have the suit.


Of Witness.

A man shall have summoned all witnesses and first quests of them that
have to follow his suit before the court go forth.

It is right that he call the quest of twelve before the court go forth,
and also at the court.

It is a right summons if he himself hear it or in his place if his
booth-mates hear it.

When a man wish to call a quest of twelve he shall name witnesses
to himself N. N. and M. M., by witness of whom he shall call. 'I ask
thee this,' and name the gode, 'if thou hast full gode-hood that thou
can name a full court and can bring up a quest of twelve. I enquire
of thee a lawful enquiry.'

If he say he have, then he shall name witnesses to his answer, and by
their witness he shall summon. 'I call on thee for a quest of twelve,'
and name the gode, and declare what is the case he calls him for,
'and to bring with thee eleven of the men of thy trithing, but thou
thyself shalt be the twelfth. I summon a legal quest.'


Quests of Neighbours.

When a man will call a quest of neighbours, he shall go thither to
the booth of the man that he will have called therein, and it will
be lawful for him to call him so that he hear it himself, and it
will be lawful for him to call at his place when he wishes to call,
so that his booth-mates may hear.

If a man know not whether he be a householder or under grith whom
he wisheth to have called, then he ought to enquire of him before
witnesses whether he be a freeholder or under grith, and say what
his reason is for asking, and enquire with a lawful enquiry, and name
witness to the answer that he shall get.

If he wish to call a man that is a moot-member for another man's
holding then he ought to enquire with witnesses, if he knew it not
before, whether he owns lawful domicile there or not, and whether he
be moot-member for such a man's holding, and name the franklin. And
so he shall speak in his summons as the other answers him that which
he enquireth of him.

But if he that is enquired of will not answer or lies about the matter
then he is convict for a three-mark fine, and he that enquireth of
him hath the pursual, or the neighbour that is summoned in his stead,
if he will not take the case. Their case shall be summoned at the
law-hill, and a quest called of five neighbours of him that is pursued.

If a man summon a man under grith and thinketh that he is a franklin,
or summons a grith-man on another man's holding that yet hath not
lawful domicile there, yet the summons will be right, though men
try to question it, if so be that he can get a quest to say that
he summoned him whom he thought to be a most lawful man, and had no
means of enquiry.

If a man call grith-men on a quest of neighbours, or the steward of
him that is not a member of the moot, and he summons him so that they
themselves may hear his summons, and hath the means to put a lawful
question if he chose, then his case is null. Yet he may save himself
by a saving quest-verdict, that he gave the summons so that they did
not hear him.


The going forth of the Courts.

The courts shall go forth on the appointed day [Saturday], and no
later than when from the hill of laws out of the law-speaker's place
the sun can be seen to come on the bank of the upper rift [5 p. m.],
when the law-speaker and the godes are all bound to walk forth with
their doomsters, also those men that have causes.

The man that hath a cause he becometh an outlaw if he go with more
men than ten to the court.

If a man come not out that hath a suit to sue by the time the sun can
be seen from the law-speaker's seat to have come on the west bank
of the rift he shall then be convict for a three-mark fine, and he
shall win the suit that he hath the case against. This suit shall be
summoned at the hill of laws, and a quest called of five neighbours
of him that is sued. If he can get the verdict that he would have
come before the sun's coming was seen then he upsets the case.


Of the Casting of Lots.

If six doomsters or more are come out it is right for them that have
causes to plead to cast lots for the court for all them that have
causes in the court, and point out the place where they are to cast
lots among themselves for the order of taking their cases.

Every man of them that hath a cause to go to court shall put in
a cloth one lot, even though he have more cases than one before
the court. Every man should mark his lot, and they shall put them
altogether in the cloths, and then a man could take up four [1233]
lots together.

They shall first plead their cases whom the lot falls to, one after
the other as the lot hath fallen.

Now if any come not to the lot-casting they shall plead their cases
last. It shall also be right that a second man put his lot in the
cloth, and then they shall plead according to their lots. Those cases
shall not be put to the lot that were not judged the last summer,
if they be not more or less than four. But they shall be put to the
lot among themselves if there be more than four of them. All these
cases shall be pleaded first, and the cases next that have begun here
at this moot.

If a man was not ready when the lots were first cast, then he shall ask
leave of the man that had the last lot to plead his case before his,
and he shall give him leave; but if he gave him not leave, then he
hath the right to plead his cause, if he be not ready [at the first],
by the leave of the doomsters.









Prayer to listen to Oath-taking or Oath-spelling.

The man that will plead a case shall name himself witnesses. 'I name
N. N. and M. M. to witness this, that I pray this man that I will
here sue by suit to listen to my oath-spelling and to my setting
forth of my cause, or the man that hath the defence for him, and the
gode that bringeth the quest of twelve about the man that he hath a
suit against.'


Of setting forth or pleading a Case.

He shall take an oath that pleadeth his case, and call the quest
to witness whom he summoned and for what he summoned him, and what
penalty he laid on him, and call the quest to witness to what moot he
summoned him, and that he summoned a lawful summons, and he setteth
forth his cause as it hath been in court against N. N. when he summoned
him. Then shall one of them bear witness and keep all the words in his
witness-bearing that he [the principal] had in his summons, and the
others shall yield consent to the witness that he hath thus borne, etc.

[After sections on witnesses, challenges, quest verdicts, of witness
against verdict of quest, the defence, the summing-up by both parties,
the doomsters, disagreement of the court, from which the following
maxims are culled, there follows a later addition on the Fifth Court.]

The pursuit shall come before the defence in every case.

Before a man bring forward his defence he shall enquire with witnesses
of the man that hath the suit against him if he have brought forth
his suit against him as he thinketh or hath not. Then he ought to
answer that he hath brought forward his suit as he thinketh it,
save anything come up in his defence that be.

Then when these words are spoken it is lawful to begin the defence.

When men have brought forward their suit and defence as they will
in the court, then every man that hath a suit or defence in the
court shall have a summing-man for his case, whether he be pursuer
or defender.

It shall be also before they give their judgment, they [the doomsters]
shall also take an oath unless they have done so before. They shall
name themselves witnesses. 'I name N. N. and M. M. witness to this,
that I take an oath on the cross, a lawful oath, and say to God that
I will deem this doom as I believe the law to be.'



Of the Fifth Court.

We shall have a Court the Fifth, that is called the Fifth Court.

Men shall be named to this court from each of the old gode-hoods,
nine men out of each Quarter. The godes that have new gode-hood they
shall name another twelve men to the court, and there shall be four
twelves there; and there are twelve men out of each Quarter among them.

And the fifth court shall be appointed when the Quarter-courts are
named, but they shall not go forth together to their jurisdictions
unless the law-court-men agree otherwise.

And the fifth court shall sit in the law-court.

These cases shall come into the fifth court: lying verdicts that are
borne here at the moot, or lying witnesses, or what a man declares
what is wrong on his manhood, and disagreements of court that take
place here, or offering of bribes or taking of bribes that hap here,
and also if men bargain for money here, and all the false witness
that happeneth here on the All-moot, and the maintenance of outlaws
that are here without guile convicted, and withal are reckoned cases
of housing bond-debtors, and of the thralls of them that are declared
here at the All-moot to be debt-fast or bond-debtors, and also where
men take labour from these men, and the harbouring of church priests
and also of communion with those that do otherwise than is spoken
in the laws. Of all these cases that have now been reckoned there
shall be notice given to-day and to-morrow [Friday and Saturday],
and it is lawful the second day of the week [Monday] and the third
[Tuesday], if they be not holidays.


Court of Leet or Execution.

A court of leet or execution [féráns-dómr] shall be held upon every
man that hath become convicted when fourteen nights be gone from the
moot where he was convicted.

The court shall be held where his domicile was when the suit was
brought against him before he was convicted.

The court shall be called or named outside the house-garth where
there is neither acre nor mead, but yet not farther off than ear-shot
distance of the house-garth.

Men are bound to follow the gode to the court of leet, all they that
are nearest if he will summon them, whether they be his moot-men or
no. Three marks outlaw-fine he pays that refuseth if he get a full
court, but otherwise a neck-ring-garth [fine].

He shall come there before midday and name the court, and so shall
those men come that have law business. There shall be a twelve
thane-court. The court shall be challenged as a quest of twelve.... If
there be two moots on one moot-field....


Of the Spring Moot.

We shall have a spring-moot in our land. Three godes shall have the
moot together. They shall not have any moot longer than a week-moot,
and no shorter than a five nights' moot save leave be asked of the
court of laws.

They shall not have the spring-moot later than when six weeks of the
summer be gone and the soken-moot be ended. The spring-moot shall
not be before the fourth week of the summer coming there.

The gode shall name the court there, and each of them shall name
twelve men to the court to doom all the cases that come into that
court as the law binds them to do.... If men come later to the moot
than one night ... their case is null....

The courts shall go forth so that the cases all come therein before
the sun be down, and men shall cast lots for the cases just as at the
All-moot; and also take oaths and go about their suit and also their
defence as at the All-moot. If men hold back any proofs the fine is
the same as in All-moot, and they must be summoned at the moot-brink
to the court.


Of the Law of Leets.

We shall have leets, and those godes that are over the moots together
shall have the leets together, and their leet shall be where their
moot-stead is, save they get leave for another.

The leet shall not be later than the Lord's-day. When on the
bathing-day [Saturday] before there are yet eight weeks of the summer
alive, and the leet shall not be before it is fourteen nights from
the All-moot. And the leet shall not be shorter than a day's leet,
and no longer than a two nights' leet.

And the leet shall be hallowed just as a moot.

There on a hallowed leet just as at a moot.

There shall all novellae be said over, and the reckoning of the
season, and the [days for] keeping ember days and the long fasts
[Lent] beginning, and also if it be leap-year, or if the summer be
..., and also if men shall come to the All-moot before there be ten
weeks of the summer gone.

And the gode shall recite all particularly that owneth the moot
hallowing, unless they have settled it otherwise among them.

The moot-men all ought to make berths there when they are at moot
if they wish; they ought to have their homes there while they are at
leet or moot or make their berths.


Of Outlaws.

If men bring the man out hither that the same summer was made an
outlaw, they shall be outlawed....

If men bring out hither a man that was made an outlaw the summer
before, they must do one of two things, either slay him or bring him
to them that outlawed him in the half-month that they know that he
was convicted. If they will do neither, then they shall be outlaws
therefore....

Wolf-hedin said it was lawful for a man to bring a suit for
maintainance of outlaws or life-ring-men that are called wanderers.

There shall be four Flitting Days here in this land. The first is when
it is the fifth or sixth week of the summer. On this day a man has
the choice of taking his domicile. The second is fast-day [Friday],
the third is Saturday, the fourth is the Lord's-day.

Now if a gode wish to go away from the country, then it is right that
he say at the spring-moot who shall manage his gode-hood.





CHAPTER 4

§ 4. NIAL AND THE FIFTH COURT.

In Nial's Saga, as we have it now, there is much law matter, but the
greater part thereof is of the nature of a legal romance. But the
passage relating to the creation of the Fifth Court is of a different
colour and weight. It once in its essence formed part of the older
Story of Nial from which the present complex Niala is partly composed,
compiled or edited by its late 13th-century editor. One proof of this
occurred to the editor while transcribing (in 1884) the texts for
this book. It occurs in the phrase where Hilde-gund answers Flose's
announcement of Haus-coll's desire to marry her. 'She said, that she
was a proud woman. "And I don't know how this match will do for me;
first, there are impediments; and last, not least, the man has no
chieftaincy."' Touches such as this, pathetic and human, are in the
very spirit of Nial's Saga. Hilde-gund, who is to be not the least
victim of this ill-timed and unnatural marriage, feels as it were
a shudder as she is asked for her consent, for there is the stain
of blood-guilt between her husband and Nial and the spirit of the
feud that calls for more blood still. After the brief and hurried
reference to this ill-omened matter, she passes on, woman-like, to
a less objectionable point, with the kind of half hope that it may
settle the matter for her and save her the cost of refusal. Altogether
an admirable bit of character-painting, with a touch of pathos as
befits the note of warning and the first knell of falling fate.

The text of all the MSS. extant, no small number (some eight vellums),
instead of 'mein (impediments)' here read 'menn (men),' which is
nonsense. It is evident that the archetype of our present form of
Niala read 'menn;' but equally evident that the old Saga, from which
that archetype was taken, must have read 'mein.' The confusion might
easily occur in dictation: in MS. the two would read 'm' or 'mñ' and
'mein.' The oldest Story of Nial, therefore, preserved the tradition
of Nial's connection with the creation of the Fifth Court.

The piece which we have placed at the end in small type is clearly
the legal compiler's. He here gets an opportunity for exercising his
peculiar delight in legal antiquarianisms, and he has dealt with the
incident in a lengthy but rather crabbed paraphrase. The contrast in
diction is manifest; the interpolation is pedantic, obscure, and ill
at ease.

We can nearly date the compilation of the present Niala. None of the
MSS. go back beyond say the last ten years of the 13th century. The
genealogies speak of Sturlungs, Oddaverjar, and of Kolban the Young
(died 1245). The compiler of it may be put in the third quarter of the
same century, at a time when the Commonwealth was dead. During the
throes of the civil feuds perhaps no Fifth Court was ever held. At
the end of that time of strife Norwegian laws were drifting in,
when the older laws and customs were therefore beginning to be of
antiquarian interest. He seems to have possessed not only an old book
of genealogies, which he uses largely (what he gives being printed
above, Bk. I. § 2), but also a scroll or scrolls on Procedure,
which he has, so to speak, dramatized, filling up blanks from his
own imagination or modern practice.

In 1884 the editor took five transcripts of this chapter, viz. AM. 468,
132, K, G, and AM. 162 fragm., consisting of twenty-four leaves
[for the notation, see Introd. to Bk. I. § 2]. In this case K seems
to be the best; hence we have followed it, only there is a blank
down to the words 'goðorz lôsom manne;' that beginning is taken from
AM. 132. K, or the Book of Calfbeck in the west of Iceland (Mýrar),
was once a most beautiful vellum (soft parchment, broad margins,
fine illuminations); in the 17th century it has been ruthlessly
cut up, and maltreated by knife and damp and rot. A copy of John
Halldorsson's--the later historian--was taken in 1697; he filled
in the lacunas from a transcript of John Erlendsson's. This copy,
in his neat handwriting, is now AM. 464.







Nú es þar til máls at taka, at Niáll kom at mále við Haoscolld:
'Ráðs vilda ek þer leita, fóstre mínn, at afla þer kono.' Haoscolldr
bað hann fyrer ráða, ok spurðe hvar hann munde hellzt á leita. 'Kona
heiter Hildigunnr,' seger hann, 'ok es Starkaðar dótter, Þórðar sonar
Freys-goða; veit-ek þann kost beztan,' seger hann.5 Haoscolldr mælte:
'Siá þú fyrer, fóstre; þat scal mítt ráð sem þú vill vera taka.' 'Her
muno vit á leita [1234],' seger Niáll.

Efter þat kveðr Niáll menn til ferðar með ser, fóro þeir Sigfúss syner,
ok syner Niáls aller, ok Káre Solmundar son. Þeir ríða austr til
Svína-fellz, ok fá þar góðar viðtaokor. Ok um10 dagenn efter ganga
þeir Niáll ok Flose á tal, ok þar koma niðr roeðor Niáls, at hann
mælte. 'Þat er eyrende mítt hingat, es ver faorom bónorz faor ok mælom
til mægða við þik, Flose, en til eigin-orz við Hildigunne broðor-dóttor
þína.' 'Fyrer hvers haond?' seger Flose. 'Fyrer haond Haoscollz Þráens
sonar fóstra5 mins,' seger Niáll. 'Vel es slíkt stofnat,' seger Flose;
'en þó hafeð ér miket [1235] í hætto hvárer við aðra--eða hvat
seger þú frá Haoscollde.' 'Gótt má segja frá hónom,' seger Niáll;
'ok skal ek svá fé til leggja, at yðr þycki soemilega, ef ér vilið
þetta mál at á-litom goera.'--'Kalla muno vit á hána,' seger Flose,
'ok vita10 hverso henne lítezk maðr.' Þá vas kallað á hána, ok hon
kom þagat. Flose seger henne bónorðet. Hon kvez vesa kona skap-stór,
'ok veit-ek eige hverso mer er hent, við þat at þar ero mein [1236]
svá fyrer: en þat þó eige síðr at siá maðr hefer ecke manna-forráð;
en þú hefer þat mælt, at þú munder eige gifta mik goðorz-lausom15
manne.' 'Þat er oeret eitt til,' seger Flose, 'ef þú vill eige giftaz
Haoscollde at ek man oengan á goera kostenn.'--'Þat mælta-(ek)eige,'
seger hon, 'at ek vilja eige giftask Haoscollde, ef ér fáet hónom
manna forráð, en ella mun-ek engan kost á goera.'--Niáll mælte:
'Þá vil-ek láta bíða mín um þetta mál þriá vetr.'20 Flose seger
svá vesa skolo. 'Þann hlut vil-ek til skilja,' seger Hildigunnr,
'ef þesse raóð takask, at vit sém austr her.' Niáll kvazk þat vilja
skilja under Haoskolld. Hoskollor lézk maorgom vel trua, en aongom
betr an fóstra sínom.--Nú ríða þeir austan.

Ok leitar Niáll Haoskollde um manna-forráð, ok vilde einge selja sítt
goðorð. Líðr nú sumaret til Alþingess. Þat sumar vóro þing-deilor
miklar; goera þá marger sem vaner vóro at fara5 til fundar við Niál;
en hann lagðe þat til mála manna sem ecki þótte líkligt, at eyddesk
[1237] sókner ok svá varner [1238], ok varð af því þræta mikel,
es málen maótto eige lúkask, ok riðo menn heim af þinge ó-sátter.

Líðr nú þar til es koemr annat þing. Niáll reið til þings, ok vas10
fyrst kyrt þinget allt þar til es Niáll talaðe til at maonnom være
mál at lýsa saokom sínom. Marger mælto, at til lítils þoette [1239]
þat koma, ef einge maðr koeme síno mále framm þótt til Alþingess
være stefnt,--'ok viljo ver heldr,' segja þeir, 'heimta með odde ok
eggjo.' 'Svá má eige vesa,' seger Niáll, 'ok hlýðer þat15 hverge,
at hafa eige laog í lande; en þó hafeð ér mikit til yðvars máls,
ok koemr þat til vár es laogonom skolom [1240] stýra, at sætta
mennena ok efla friðenn; þycke mer ráð at ver kallemk saman aller
haofðingjarner ok talem her til.' Þeir gengo þá til laogretto, Niáll
mælte: 'Þik kveð-ek at þesso, Skafte Þórodz son, ok aðra20 haofðingja,
at mer þicker sem maólom órom sé komet í ónýtt efne, ef var skolom
soekja maól í fiórðungs-dómom, ok verðe svá vafet at eige mege lúkask
né framm ganga. Þycke mer þat ráðligra, at ver ættem enn fimta dóm
[1241], ok soektem þar þau maól í fimtar-dóme er eige mego lúkask í
fiórðungs dómom.' [a. ...] [1242] Efter þat leidde Skafte Þóroddz son
í laog fimtar-dóm. [b. ...] [1243] Síðan gengo menn til Laogbergs:
tóko menn þá upp ný goðorð. [c. ...] [1244]5

Þá kvadde Niáll ser hlióðs, ok mælte: 'Þat er maonnom kunnegt hverso
fór með sonom mínom ok Griótár-maonnom, at þeir draópo Þráen Sigfús
son. En síðan sættomk ver á málet, ok hefe-ek teket nú við Haoscollde,
ok ráðet hónom kván-fang, ef hann fær goðorð nockot: en einge vill
selja sítt goðorð. Vil-ek nú biðja10 yðr, at ér lofet mer at taka upp
nýtt goðorð á Hvíta-nese [1245] til handa Haoscollde.' Hann feck þat
af aollom. Tók Niáll þá upp goðorð til handa Haoscollde; ok var hann
kallaðr síðan Haoscolldr Hvítaness-goðe. Efter þat riðo menn heim
af þinge.

Niáll dvalðesk skamma stund heima, áðr hann ríðr austr til15
Svína-fellz, ok syner hans, ok vekr til um bónorð við Flosa; en
hann lézk efna munda við þá aoll maól. Vas þá Hildigunn faostnoð
Haoscollde, ok á kveðen brullaups-stefna, ok lýkr svá með þeim. Ríða
þeir þá heim; en í annat sinne ríða þeir til brúðhlaups: leyste Flose
þá út fé hennar efter boðet, ok greidde vel af hende. Fara þau20 þá
til Bergþórs-hváls ok vóro þar þau missere: ok fór allt vel með þeim
Hildigunne ok Bergþóro.






How the Fifth Court was set up.

Now the tale is to be taken up where Nial was talking to Haus-coll. 'I
would fain seek a match for thee, my foster-son, and get thee a
wife.' Haus-coll bade him order the matter, and asked whither he meant
first to seek. Nial said, 'There is a woman named Hilde-gund, and
she is the daughter of Stark-ad the son of Thord, Frey's priest. That
is the best match that I know.' Haus-coll said, 'Do thou see to it,
foster-father. What thou wouldest have shall be my will.' 'We two
will try her then,' says Nial.

After this Nial calls men to go a journey with him. There went the
Sigfus's sons, and all Nial's sons, and Care Sol-mund's son. They rode
east to Swine-fell, and got a good welcome there. The next day Nial
and Flose fell into talk, and the end of Nial's talk was this that
he spake thus. 'This is my errand hither. We are come as suitors,
and we want to wed into thy family, Flose, and sue for Hilde-gund
thy niece.' 'On whose behalf?' says Flose. 'On behalf of Haus-coll
Thrainson, my foster-son,' says Nial. 'Such a suit is very reasonable,'
says Flose; 'but yet ye stand in no little jeopardy towards each other
[alluding to the blood-feud between Nial's sons and Haus-coll]. But
what sayest thou for Haus-coll?' 'I can speak well of him,' says Nial,
'and I will settle such a sum on his behalf as ye shall consider
honourable, if ye will take thought over this case.' 'Let us call
the lady,' says Flose, 'and find out how she likes the man.' Then
Hilde-gund was called, and she came where they were. Flose told her of
the offer of marriage. She said that she was a proud woman. 'And I do
not know how it will suit me, seeing that there are such impediments
in the way [the blood-guilt]; and there is this, too, not the least,
that this man hath no chieftainship, and thou hast told me that thou
wouldest not marry me to a man that had not a chieftainship.' 'That
alone is enough,' says Flose, 'if thou dost not wish to be married
to Haus-coll, then I will take no thought over it.' 'I do not say,'
says she, 'that I do not wish to be married to Haus-coll, if ye can get
him a chieftainship; but if not I will take no thought over it.' Nial
spoke: 'Now I will ask you to let this suit stand over for three
winters [years].' Flose said that it should be so. Hilde-gund said,
'I will lay this condition upon you, if this bargain is to stand,
that we shall live here in the east.' Nial said that Haus-coll must
settle that. But Haus-coll said that he trusted many men well, but
none so well as his foster-father. Now they rode home from the east.

Nial sought for a chieftainship for Haus-coll, but no man was willing
to sell his gode-hood. The year was on till the All-moot. That summer
there were many matters at issue at the moot, and many men came to
seek Nial as they were wont, but he gave such counsel on men's cases
as was not thought the most promising, and the suits were quashed and
the defences also, and there arose great murmuring or discord because
men's cases were not finished, and men rode home with their quarrels
open from the moot.

Now the year wears on till the next moot. Nial rode to the moot, and at
first there was no stir at the moot, till Nial said that it was time
for men to give notice of their suits. But many men said that they
thought it of little use, for no man's suit could get forward though
it were set for hearing at the All-moot, 'and we are rather minded,'
said they, 'to seek our rights by point and edge!' 'That may not
be,' says Nial, 'and it would never do not to have law in the land;
nevertheless ye have much matter of complaint in this, but to find a
remedy this touches us that must steer the law and set men at peace. It
seemeth best to me that we, the chieftains, should come together.'

Then they went to the Court of Laws, and Nial spake: 'I call on thee
on this head, Shafto Thoroddsson and other chieftains, for me-thinketh
that our cases are in a poor way, if we are to carry our suits to
the Quarter-courts and there be such quibbling then that none can
end or get on. I think this would be the best, that we should set
up a Fifth Court, and follow up those suits in the Fifth Court that
cannot be brought to an end in the Quarter-courts.' [Passage made
up and interpolated by latest editor follows.] After that Shafto
brought forward and carried the Fifth Court.... Then men went to the
hill of laws, then men took up new gode-hoods.... Then Nial called
for silence, and spake: 'It is known now to many men how matters
went between my sons and the men of Grit-water; how they slew Thrain
Sigfus's son; nevertheless we are set at peace over that suit, and I
have now fostered Haus-coll, and got him a wife if only he can get a
gode-hood, but no man will sell him his gode-hood, wherefore I will
pray you now to give me leave to take up a new gode-hood at White-ness
on Haus-coll's behalf.' And he got leave of all so to do. Then Nial
took up the chieftainship on Haus-coll's behalf, and he was called
ever after Haus-coll the White-ness priest. After that men rode home
from the moot.

Nial dwelt a short while at home before he rode eastward to Swine-fell,
he and his sons, and mooted the suit to Flose. Flose said he would
fulfil all his engagements, and Hilde-gund was then betrothed to
Haus-coll, and the bridal was fixed, and so they parted. Then they
rode home; and they went thither a second time to the bridal. At the
close of the feast Flose gave up her portion or endowed her out of
his own possessions, paying all liberally. Hilde-gund and Haus-coll
came home to Berg-thor's knoll, and were there a season, and all went
well between Hilde-gund and Berg-thora.











The Interpolation.


a.  [1246]'Skaltú,' seger Skapte, 'nefna fimtar-dómenn er fyrer forn
goðorð er nefndr fiórðungs-dómr, þrennar [1247] tylfter í fiórðunge
hverjum?' 'Siá mun ek ráð till þess,' seger Niáll, 'at taka upp [1248]
ný goðorð, þeir er bezt ero til fallner or fiórðunge hverjom, ok segez
í þing með þeim er þat vilja sam-þyckja.' 'Þenna kost viljom ver,'
seger Skapte: 'eða hverso vandar sókner skulo her í koma?' 'Þau mál
skulu5 her í koma,' seger Niáll, 'um alla þings-afglöpun, ef menn bera
liúg-vitne eða liúg-kviðu; her skolu ok í koma véfangs mál oll þau er
menn véfengja í fiórðungs-dóme, ok skal þeim stefna til fimtar-dóms:
svá ok, ef menn bióða eða taka fé til liðs ser; ok inni-hafner þræla
eða skyldar-manna [1249]. Í þessum dóme skulo vera aller ener sterkosto
eiðar, ok fylgja ij [1250] hverjum eiði, er þat skolo leggja under
þegn-skap10 sínn er hiner sverja: Svá skal ok, ef annarr ferr með
rétt mál en annarr með rangt, þá skal efter þeim doema et rétt ferr
at sókn. Her (skal) ok soekja hvert mál sem í fiórðungs-dóme, útan þat
þá er nefndar ero fernar tylfter í Fimtar-dóm, þá skal sækjande nefna
[1251] sex menn or dóme, en verjande aðra sex; en ef hann vill eige
or nefna þá skal sækjande þá or nefna sem hina. En ef sækjande nefner
eige or, þá15 er ónýtt málet, þvi at þrennar tylfter skolu um doema.

Ver skolom ok hafa þá laogrétto-skipan, at þeir skolo rétter at
ráða fyrer lofom ok logom [1252] er sitja á mið-pollom, ok skal þá
velja til þess er vitrazter ero ok bezt at ser, ok þar skal ok vera
fimtar-dómr. En ef þeir verða eige á-sátter er í logréttu sitja, hvat
þeir vitja lofa eðr í log leiða, þá skolo þeir ryðja logréttu til,
ok20 skal ráða afl með þeim. En ef nockurr er sá fyr útan logréttu,
er eige nái inn at ganga, eða þykiz borenn vera mále, þá skal hann
verja lýriti svá at heyre í logréttu, ok hefer hann þá ónýtt fyrer
þeim oll log [1253] þeirra, ok allt þat er þeir mæla til log-skila;
ok varðe lýriti.

b. Ok allt þat er nú var talat.25

c. Tóko menn þá upp ný goðorð. Í Norðlendinga-fiórðunge vóro þesse
ný goðorð: Melmanna-goðorð í Miðfirðe,--þat tók upp Oddr Úfeigs
son.--Laufæsinga goðorð í Eyjafirðe. [See p. 329.]










PART III

BOOK III.

CONVERSION AND EARLY CHURCH OF ICELAND.


The nucleus of facts on this head lies in Landnama-book and Libellus,
the former supplying many notices of Christian settlers, both Irish
and Scandinavian, before the various missions and the legal conversion
of the island at the All-moot in 1000 or 1001. But for a completer
account of the foundation of the Church of Iceland the authorities
must be sought in the following sections.

Section 1 includes Christne Saga, or the History of Christendom in
Iceland, a counterpart to Are's account, which is, in its present
13th-century form, a complex mass of materials of various age and
style. It is followed here by a work which, from parts of it being
mixed up with Christne Saga, and from its connection with Gunlaug,
cannot be separated from it, viz. the History of Thorvald the
Traveller.

In Section 2 are Early Church Legends in Iceland before the missions,
Latinized and afterwards rendered into the vernacular.

Section 3 contains the Biographies of the first seven Bishops of
Scalholt (fl. 1056-1211), in three works, Hunger-waker or Hunger-whet
(the first five Bishops' Lives) (1056-1176); the Life of Bishop
Thorlac, the national Saint (1178-1193); the Life of Bishop Paul
(1195-1211). Hunger-waker and Paul's Life being at least by the
same author.

Section 4. The Life of S. John, Bishop of Holar (1106-1121), by a
contemporary of the author of Hunger-waker.

Section 5. The Second Life of S. Thorlac, written c. 1250, much
concerned with the glebe question, which was too delicate a subject
for the Hunger-waker author to dwell upon.

Section 6. A fragment of a translation of a lost Latin Life of S. John
of Holar, by Gunlaug, d. 1219.

Section 7. Biographica Minora, or sundry supplementary pieces of
Saga-type touching Gizor, Islaf, Magnus, and Cetil, together with
the drastic narrative of the election of Bishop Godmund.

Section 8. Early Ecclesiastical legislation from the Tithe Law of
Bishop Gizor and the Christian Law of Bishops Thorlac and Cetil.

Section 9. The earlier and more typical Icelandic Charters of Church
Endowment.







CHAPTER 1

§ 1. CHRISTNE SAGA

THE STORY OF THE CONVERSION OF ICELAND.


This work is, upon the very face of it, a composite work of divers
parts and origins. The main and most noteworthy constituent (a) is a
history of the eventful years 999-1001, in which the conversion of the
land was effected. The history of these notable years has come down
to us in a double form,--(1) that of Libellus, ch. 7, and (2) the
narrative in our Saga, the respective heroes of which are Gizor and
Healte or Sholto. Of the first, that of Gizor, we can easily account
for the preservation--it is derived from his son bishop Islaf and his
grandson and namesake bishop Gizor, the law-maker and statesman, whose
brother Tait was the foster-father of Are the historian. This version
we may call the Arean, Official, Scalholtine one. It is political
in tone, though it reaches us through such ecclesiastical sources,
and is valuable as preserving for us the legal aspect of the change
of faith. The other or local Southern account would naturally come
to us from Sholto's own family. This version is wholly different in
style from the other. There is something of Bæda in its tone--cheerful,
pious, gentle, and firm. Sholto was a native of the Steer-water county
in the South, of mixed Norse and Celtic (Un-Norse) descent, lineally
descended, like bishop S. Thorlac, from a Cetil (here representing
Gael. Cathal) the One-handed; descended also from a settler Lunan
(Irish): Sholto's very name is expressive of this descent, meaning
Shetlander or Shelty, and (if we be right) the Caledonian. His only
daughter became the great-grandmother to Magnus, the fourth bishop
of Scalholt (d. 1148). Sholto was Gizor's son-in-law by Gizor's
first wife.

The life and character of this type of Norse-Celts, such as Sholto,
Nial, S. Thorlac, S. John of Holar, Stephen, and Ceartan, are
worth studying. Sholto himself was witty, full of resource, kindly,
and upright of life, unspotted from the world in which he moved,
loving and beloved--a beautiful individual character, and unlike
any of the numerous and varied heroic types Icelandic literature
has drawn for us. Sholto's bright and ready speech at the Moot, his
three epigrammatic verses, his declaration that Christian sacrifice
means devotion to a holy life, his pardoning and serving his would-be
assassin, the skill in the management of a great cause so well shown by
his whole policy, and the fact that he was chosen by S. Olaf to assist
the king in mending the church laws of Iceland (O. H. 1853, ch. 46)
and again for an embassage on which no slight import was attached,
are among the instances that illustrate his personalty and qualities.

The somewhat cold and legal aspect in which Are presents the
conversion has led writers to think the change of faith in Iceland a
mere political expedient; but the warm and sympathetic narrative that
centres about Sholto speaks loudly and conclusively against this view
(which indeed is, à priori, untenable). It is a pity that we have but
this headless, tailless piece of a lost Sholto's Saga. Sholto enters
and makes his exit with a ditty on his lips; the mocking chaunt on
the Law-hill ushers him in, as it were, and with the laughing taunt
at his old enemy as he fills his mouth with the baptismal salt he
vanishes from us. The whole must have been a delightful story. As
it is, the fragment gives colour and fragrance to the heterogeneous
medley now known as Christne Saga. As to its author or authors,
its date, or original MSS., we know but little.

It is curious to place side by side the account in Libell. ch. vii. and
Christne S. chs. 6-8. In the former, as in those who draw on Are
(e. g. Hunger-waker, Olaf Tryggvason's Saga, Eyrbyggia, ch. 49),
Gizor is the chief man; 'þeir Gizorr' is Are's recurring phrase. In
the other Sholto is the leader, Gizor the second; and 'þeir Healte'
is the standing phrase; sometimes 'þeir H. and G.,' where Gizor
is superabundant, and a gloss is apparent. That here, and not in
Are's record, we have the true statement of the case, is proven by
the two crosses, one of which marked the king's height, one (note
this!) Sholto's, not Gizor's. It is Sholto who speaks at the Law-hill,
and so it is in conformance with this, that some sixteen years later,
S. Olave summons Sholto and the Speaker Shafto as being the two
foremost, wisest, and best men of Iceland [1254].

As it stands now in Christne Saga, this Southern version is larded with
a few stray glosses and morsels out of Libellus (Libell. ch. vii). We
have not eliminated them, as it would make the narrative rather broken
and clumsy. The last chapter (10. 2-7, 9) is drawn almost entirely from
the two last chapters of Libellus. This section is headed by the words,
'This is the record of Are the Old,' which we now see refers to what
follows, not to the preceding or to the whole work. It looks as if our
editor had had before him a copy (or part of a copy) of Libellus of the
end of the 12th century, when Are the Young (the historian's grandson)
was still alive. Are's also would be the Lists of Chiefs, and a long
quotation which now closes the Saga (chs. 1. 2 and 10. 8, 10).

The third constituent of Christne Saga (b) is the Thangbrand and
Hall piece, which, though it breathes something of the spirit of the
Sholto piece, is yet of separate origin. That it is no part or parcel
of the Sholto piece is proved by the fact that the compiler of the
story in Niala, though he largely uses the Thangbrand section, yet
shows no marks of cognizance of the Sholto section. Yet the story is,
we believe, of Southern origin also.

The fourth constituent (g) is the account of the Christianity of the
North-West country, especially about the Neck. Who is the author?

The Christne Saga editor, though his work is chequered enough, gives
but two names, Are and Brand the Far-traveller, citing a verse of
his on Thorwald Wide-traveller. On the other hand, Landnama-book
(II. 13. 1) names a Brand Frode, a prior, as having written the
Genealogies of the Borg-frithers [1255]. We think both refer to
the same person: the Brand of the Genealogies was the sixth lineal
descendant of the chief settler in Upper Borg-frith (as was Are in
Broad-frith his county), hence his life would fall in the early 12th
century. The name Frode marks Brand as a compeer of Are, Sæmund,
Colsceg. Again, the verse in our Saga points to a writer of the
early 12th century; both names agree; both write on the same subject,
for the verse treats of a sainted Borg-frith man whose grave on the
Dnieper the poet had visited. Hence we infer that the two Brands are
identical. The genealogical work (and poem), we take it, treated
of Borg-frith worthies, and was a history of Borg-frith families
in a wider sense (Ld. I. 7 sqq. and beginning of Bk. II. Ld. II. 2,
treats of Brand's own ancestors). Here were related the records of
old Christianity in Borg-frith, of Ans-wolf, of the Bishops in By;
and, lastly, the story of Thorwald, which, in the first instance,
is due, we hold, to Brand.

Another name of a writer treading the same field,--Gunlaug, the
Benedictine, of Thing-eyre,--is not mentioned in our Saga, but thrice
cited in the Thorwald Appendix to it, and in the Church Legends
of the North (p. 411 twice, 414 once): he was a noted ecclesiastic
and Latinist, died in 1219 at a high age, for he mentions a man who
died in 1148 as dying 'within his life-time' (see § 6). His birth
and Brand's death (year unknown) would thus well-nigh coincide. He,
we take it, endited in Latin some of Brand's records, adding local and
personal notices of his own. His Latin work is lost, but what remains
has come down to us in a 14th-century translation or paraphrase. It
is to these two we owe our knowledge of bishop Frederick and Thorwald.

By way of summing up--


    a. The Sholto Section = Chs. 6-8.
    b. The Thangbrand Section = Chs. 3-5.
    g. The Brand Section = Chs. 1. 1, 3-5; 2 and 9 and 3. 5.
    d. The Libellus Section = Ch. 10. 2-7, 9, etc.
    e. Other works of Are = Chs. 1. 2; 10. 8, 10.


Who could have put this four or fivefold compound together? On this
head we have but scant means of judgment. It is a mechanical piece of
work which the unknown editor has performed. He has skilfully managed
to make out from his sundry authorities a consecutive narrative,
but he has luckily not taken much pains to alter or unify the pieces
of his patch-work. Hence, though the whole impression of the work
is spoilt by its piebald appearance, yet we can easily make out the
different styles of the originals upon which he drew. Ancient editors,
like architects of old, had no sense of incongruity, and were content,
so the whole edifice fulfilled its purpose, to let each different
part of the building stand in individuality, without endeavouring to
secure factitious unity by elaborate falsification.

Was it Hawk (from whose MS. the fullest and the unique text is taken)
that compiled this work? It is not impossible; but on the whole we
think not. He would most likely have told us something of his own share
in the book (as he does in Landnama-book), like the conscientious
scribe he was. We should expect to find some such statement as
'I have put this book together out of the writings of Brand, Are,'
etc. etc. Again, the remark (ch. 2. 3 at the end) as to the church
of Ridge, still existing when bishop Botolf was at Holar (which,
however, may be a gloss on Gunlaug's scroll), looks like the words
of the editor, writing between 1238-1246. The mechanical execution,
at any rate, is late. The strange mention of Hugbert as archbishop of
Canterbury in 993 (instead of 1193-1206), just two centuries wrong,
would point to a later date than 1206.

The text rests upon one vellum--the Hawk's-book (of c. 1310)--wherein
it follows next after Landnama-book. Four leaves are still left of
Christne Saga, whereof one has been clipped and pared at margin and
top. A copy of Hawk's-book by John Erlendsson, c. 1650, is preserved
in AM. 105 (see Introd. to Landnama). It supplies the portions
now missing, though even in John's day Hawk's-book was imperfect,
a leaf of Mantissa, which follows Christne Saga, being gone. See the
Introduction to Mantissa (p. 266). We have marked the codex A and Cod.

There are, however, other means of helping out the A-text, which
is not quite perfect, the scribe having hurried over some lines and
phrases. Besides, the editor has at times compressed, and even left
out whole episodes, which we are able to recover in what we call
the B*-text. Thus, either a fuller and better text is preserved in
B*, ch. 2. 5, 6; ch. 5. 4; ch. 6. 4; ch. 8. 2; or a double text is
presented in ch. 4. 2, final clause; and so on, see the foot-notes.

It will be seen, that it is always the separate components we find
cited, never the whole complex Saga as we find it in Hawk's-book.

The great Olaf Tryggvason's Saga (as in AM. 61 and Flatey-book)
includes an episode of the Conversion, the compiler knows the
Thangbrand, Sholto, and Gunlaug sections, but does not exactly coincide
with Hawk's texts, making much poorer use of the Sholto section;--great
part, if not the whole, must have been first amplified and endited in a
Latin-Eccl. paraphrase (dict), and hence re-rendered into 14th-century
Norse. We mark it B*(O). That part of B*(O) which centres about Ceartan
and Tryggvason has also been through the hands of the compiler of
Laxdæla Saga, who was probably one of the Sturlung school.

Further: in Niala, chs. 101-104, the Thangbrand section is used, indeed
is the main stock-in-trade the editor had to draw upon; here the good
Thangbrand bit--the dialogue with Stan-wor or Stan-wen the poetess--is
preserved. The Niala compiler knows Are's Libellus, but does not use
Gunlaug or Brand; indeed, the southern Thangbrand section is, next to
a few incidents from Libellus, his sole authority; in general the style
of his text is poor and thin. When using this text we mark it B*(N).

Next after our text we have printed what part of Thorwald Codransson's
life, found in Flatey-book, AM. 61, and Berg-book, is not represented
in Christne Saga. It supplies a few details.

In further notice of monk Gunlaug, a word may be added here. The
compilers of Flatey-book have mixed him up with Odd the monk as
one of the authors of King Olaf Tryggvason's Saga; but it can be
proved that Odd, not Gunlaug, is to be credited with this work. The
name of Gunlaug, in this connection, is due, we believe, solely to
a misapprehension by John Thordsson the scribe (see Flatey-book,
vol. i. pp. 511-519). Wherever Gunlaug is mentioned elsewhere, it is
always in connection with early Christianity of his native county. The
account of earlier missions of Thorwald and Frederick seems to rest
partly on his authority and information, as do other local notices
of early Christianity near Thing-eyre. It is not a bold hypothesis to
conclude that Gunlaug endited in Latin some work from which most that
is preserved relating to the noble and charming personality of Thorwald
Codransson was taken by those who later edited Olaf Tryggvason's Saga.

Borgar-frith and the N.W. district about the Neck of Iceland would
seem to have been a kind of centre of old Christian associations in
Iceland. Many of the most prominent names of the early heroes and
historians of the new faith occur in connection with it. No wonder
that Brand and Gunlaug should be stirred to describe the conversion
of this district, which was largely colonized with men of Irish blood,
and distinguished by the presence of Answolf, Thorwald, and Frederick
in early days, and later by the foundations of By and Thing-eyre. The
little sketch-map marking the Church history of Iceland will show the
importance of the district. Bishop Frederick's mission was probably
a local mission to this very district, as the most hopeful and most
open to the new influences it brought.

The last chapter is in Hawk's-book all chequered and disorderly. A
large patch of Libellus has been slipped into it (here printed in
small type, pp. 404-6). Between §§ 9 and 10 there is a piece we have
eliminated and rejoined with Mantissa, ch. 1. 1.

The end of the work in the old editions is undoubtedly wrongly given,
owing to the loss of the last vellum leaf when John Erlendsson made
his copy. We have, by restoring to Mantissa its rightful chapter,
now made clear the original ending, which was one of those summaries
with which Are concludes his other works--a classified list of chiefs,
just such as that in the end chapter of Landnama, another running
series of chiefs at the different periods of the commonwealth.

Several emendations have suggested themselves in the course of study
and transcription. Amongst them are the insertion of the words 'en
sudr' (p. 377, l. 7) before and not after the name of Illuge the Red,
clearing up a difficulty which has caused much trouble.

It has not been noticed before that the remark of Sholto (p. 403) to
the old chief whose baptism he was witnessing, and also the address
to his would-be assassin (p. 393), are verses.

The ditty for which Sholto was outlawed is, as it stands in the text of
the MS., unintelligible, for it runs 'munec eigi goð geyja,' i.e. 'I
will not the gods blaspheme,' which forced the compiler of Niala
to change the line to 'spare ec eigi,' i.e. 'I will not spare the
gods to blaspheme.' The build of the verse and the parallelism show
that we have only to mend 'eigi' into some epithet of Woden, and the
whole makes sense--e.g. read 'hauga-goð' ('hauga' resembling 'eigi'
in sound), 'the grave-mound god,' an epithet not actually found,
but implied by phrases of Are's and Snorre's,--and the text runs
'mun-ec hauga-goð geyja,' 'I will the grave-god blaspheme.' 'Freya'
seems to be used in an early sense as 'lady;' Woden and his Lady.

It would seem from Sholto's three notable ditties that, like Sighwat,
he could more easily speak in verse than prose when he was moved to
wrath or mockery.

Another emendation solves a riddle which long perplexed us. In the
verse by Brand the Far-traveller, which bears all the marks of genuine
early 12th-century poetry, the account of Thorwald's resting-place
was puzzling, 'on a high cliff or hill in Drafn or Drapn in Russia,'
but by reading 'Dnapre' for 'Drapne,' by means of an easy metathesis of
the consonants, a good explanation is afforded. The hill is the rocky
Lavra of Kieff, the 'Dnapre' is our 'Dnieper,' which flows beneath
the Hill of Holy Sepulchres and Shrines, which has been an immemorial
place of pilgrimage, the one place in the East indeed, apart from
Constantinople and Jerusalem, which a Scandinavian Christian of those
days would care to visit. See Grimm Centenary Papers, Oxford, 1886.

Stefne, the missionary, was, like Sholto, of Celto-Norse descent,
being a great-grandson of the settler Beolan of Keelness. The name,
we think, means Stephen, for the Icel. Annals call King Stephen
'Stefne.' It would follow that Stefne had been in England and there
been baptized. He, like Sholto, is remembered for his ditty, one on
Earl Sigvald, which Odd, the monk, has rendered into Latin, thus--



    Nec nominabo,--pene monstrabo
    Curuus est deorsum nasus in apostata--
    Qui Svein regem de terrâ seduxit,
    Et filium Trygva traxit in dolo.



The Stefne piece would belong to the Brand section.

The pedigree at the beginning agrees with the Niala generations
(p. 244), but not with those given in Ld. III. 6. 6.

The title Christne Saga is probably, like the heads of chapters in
Landnama, of Hawk's coinage. We keep it, as it is convenient in use.







Her hefr Cristne Saogo.

Nú hefr þat Hverso Cristne kom á Ísland, at--

1. 1. Maðr hét Þórvaldr, Coðrans son, bróðor-son Atla ens Ramma. Þeir
vóro syner Eilífs Arnar, Bárðar sonar or Ál, Ketils sonar Refs,
Skíða sonar ens Gamla--Coðran bió at Gilj-aó í Vatzdal, ok vas
ágætr maðr. Þórvaldr son5 hans fór útan, ok vas fyrst í hernaðe: en
hlut-skifte þat es hann feck, lagðe hann til útlausnar her-teknom
maonnom, allt þat es hann þurfte eige at hafa til kostar sér. Af
slíko varð hann ágætr ok vinsæll.

Þórvaldr fór víða um Suðrlaond. Hann fann í Saxlande suðr10 byscop
þann es Friðrekr hét, ok tók af hónom skírn ok trú rétta, ok vas með
hónom um hríð. Þórvaldr bað byscop fara til Íslannz með ser at skíra
faoðor sínn, ok móðor, ok aðra frændr sína, þá es hans ráðe vildo
fylgja. Byscop veitte hónom þat.

2. Þeir Friðrekr byscop ok Þórvaldr kómo til Íslannz sumar þat15 es
landet hafðe bygt veret c [1256] vetra ok vii vetr.

Þá hafðe Þórkell Máne Laog-saogo.

En þesser vóro stoerster haofðingjar á landeno--

Eyjolfr Valgerðar son norðr; ok Víga-Glúmr; Arnórr Ker­lingar-nef;
Þórvarðr [1257] Spak-Baoðvars son; ok þeir Starre broeðr í Goð-daolom;
Þórkell Crafla í Vatzdale.

En vestr vóro þá--Are Márs son; Ásgeirr Cnattar son; Eyjolfr Gráe;
Gestr enn Spake; Óláfr Páe; Víga-Styrr; Snorre Goðe vas þá xviij vetra,
ok hafðe tekeð við búe at Helga-felle [1258]; Þór­steinn5 Egils son.

En suðr [1259]--Illoge enn Rauðe; ok Þórkell Máne; ok Þóroddr Goðe;
Gizorr enn Hvíte; Ásgrímr Elliða-Gríms son; Hialte Skeggja son;
Valgarðr at Hofe; Rúnolfr Ulfs son; ok syner Ornolfs í Skógom.10

En austr--Syner Þórðar Freys-goða; Síðo-Hallr; Helge Ásbiarnar son;
Víga-Biarne; ok Geiter.

3. Svá er sagt er þeir byscop ok Þórvaldr fóro um
Norðlendinga-fiórðung; ok talaðe Þórvaldr trú fyrer maonnom--þvi at
byscop undir-stóð þá eige Norroeno; en Þórvaldr flutte diarflega15
Guðs oerende; en flester menn vikoz lítt under af orðom þeirra--tók við
trú Onundr enn Cristne, son Þórgils ór Reykjar-dal, Gren­jaðar sonar;
ok Hlenne enn Gamle, son Orms Tosco-baks; ok Þórvarðr Spak-Baoðvars
son í Áse í Hialtadal; en Eyjolfr Valgerðar­son lét primsignaz.20

4. Byscop ok Þórvaldr vóro at Gilj-aó með Coðrane enn fyrsta vetr,
með xiiida mann [1260]. Þórvaldr bað faoðor sínn skíraz, en hann tók
því seinlega.

At Gilj-aó stóð steinn sá er þeir frændr haofðo blótað, ok kaolloðo
þar búa í ár-mann sínn. Coðran lézt eige mundo fyrre skíraz láta, en
hann visse hvárr meirr mætte, byscop eða ár-maðr í steinenom. Efter
þat fór byscop til steinsens, ok soeng yfer þar til er steinnenn
brast í sundr. Þá þóttez Coðran skilja at ármaðr var sigraðr. Lét
Coðran þá skíraz [1261], ok hiú hans aoll; nema Ormr, son hans,
vilde5 eige við trú taka; fór hann þá suðr í Borgar-fiaorð ok kauper
land at Hvann-eyre.

5. Ormr átte Þórvaoro, dóttor Ozorar ok Bero Egils dóttor; þeirra
dótter var Yngvildr, es átte Hermundr Illuga son. Síðan átte Ormr
Geirlaugo, dóttor Steinmóðs ur Diúpa-dal: þeirra dótter vas Bera,10
es átte Skúle Þórsteins son.

2. 1. Þeir byscop ok Þórvaldr gerðo bú at Loekja-móte í Víðe-dal,
ok bioggo þar iiij vetr. Þeir fóro víða um Ísland at boða trú. Þeir
byscop ok Þórvaldr vóro at haust-boðe í Vatzdal at Hauka-gile [1262]
með Óláfe. Þar var þá komenn Þórkell15 Crafla, ok mart annarra
manna. Þar kómo berserker tveir, er Haukr hét hvárr-tvegge; þeir buðo
maonnom kúgan, ok gengo grenjande ok óðo elda. Þá baóðo menn byscop,
at hann skylde fyrer-koma þeim. Efter þat vígðe byscop eldenn áðr
þeir oeðe; ok brunno þeir þá miok. Efter þat gengo menn at þeim,
ok draópo20 þá; ok vóro þeir foerðer á fiall upp hiá gileno--því
heiter þar Hauka-gil síðan. Efter þat lét Þórkell Crafla primsignaz;
en marger vóro skírðer, þeir er við þenna atburð vóro.

2. Þeir Þórvaldr ok byscop fóro í Vestfirðinga-fiórðung at boða
trú. Þeir kómo í Hvamm um Alþinge til Þórarens Fyls-ennis; ok var hann
þá á þinge; en Friðgerðr, kona hans, dótter Þórðar frá5 Haofða [1263],
var heima, ok son þeirra Skegge. Þórvaldr talaðe þar trú fyrer maonnom,
en Friðgerðr var meðan í hofeno ok blótaðe, ok heyrðe hvárt þeirra
orð annars; en sveinnenn Skegge hló at þeim. Þá kvað Þórvaldr þetta:


    Fór-ek með dóm enn dýra, drengr hl. m. enge ...10


Ecke léto menn skíraz af þeirra orðom í Vestfirðinga-fiórðunge, svá
at menn vite þat. En í Norðlendinga-fiórðunge haofnoðo marger menn
blótom, ok bruto skurð-goð sín; en sumer vildo eige gialda hof-tolla.

3. Þórvarðr Spak-Baoðvars son lét gera kirkjo á boe sínom í15 Áse; þat
líkaðe maonnom stór-ílla þeim er heiðner vóro.--Maðr hét Claufe, son
Þórvallz, Refs sonar frá Barðe; hann var haofðinge; hónom líkar þetta
stór-ílla við Þórvarð; ok fór hann at finna Arn­geir bróðor Þórvarðz,
ok bauð hónom kost á, hvárt hann vilde heldr brenna kirkjona, eða
drepa prest þann er byscop hafðe þar20 til fenget. Þá svarar Arngeirr:
'Let-ek hvern mínna vina at gera prestenom mein; þvi at bróðer mínn
hefer grimmlega hefnt smærre mót-gerða; en gótt ráð ætla-ek þat at
brenna kirkjona; en þó vil-ek mer engo af skifta.' Lítlo síðarr fór
Claufe til um nótt, ok vilde brenna kirkjona. Þeir vóro saman tio. En
er5 þeir kómo í kirkjo-garðenn, sýndez þeim sem elldr fyke út um alla
gluggana á kirkjonne, ok fóro því brott, at þeim sýndez aoll kirkjan
elldz-full. Ok er hann spurðe, at kirkjan var eige brunnen, fór hann
til aðra nótt, ok Arngeirr, ok ætlaðe at brenna kirkjona. En er þeir
haofðo broteð kirkjona, þá kveykðe hann elldenn með fiall-rapa10
þurrom. Elldr(enn) kviknaðe seint; þá lagðez hann niðr, ok blés at
inn-yfer þreskelldenn; þá kom aor í golfet hiá yfer haofðe hónom, en
aonnor miðlim skyrtonnar ok síðo hans. Þá hlióp hann upp ok kallaðez
eige mundo bíða ennar þriðjo. Fór Arngeirr þá heim--en kirkja sú var
ger xvj vetrom áðr Cristne var í laog teken15 á Íslande; en hún stóð þá
er Bótolfr var byscop at Hólom, svá at ecke var at gert útan at torfom.

4. Þeir Friðrekr byscop ok Þórvaldr fóro til þings, ok bað byscop
Þórvald telja trú fyrer maonnom at Laogberge, svá at hann være hiá; en
Þórvaldr talaðe. Þá svarar hónom maorgom orðom ok íllom20 gaofogr maðr,
Heðenn frá [1264] Svalbarðe ór Eyja-firðe.--Heðenn var son Þórbiarnar,
Skaga sonar, Skofta [1265] sonar; hann átte Ragneiðe stiúp-dóttor ok
bróðor-dóttor Eyjolfs Valgerðar sonar.--Þá baóðo þeir skáld níða þá
Þórvald ok byscop. Þetta vas þá kveðet:


    Hefer baorn boret byscop nio,
    Þeirra es allra Þórvaldr faðer.


Fyrir níð þat vá Þórvaldr tvá menn, þá er ort haofðo kvæðet [1266].5

5. En er þeir Þórvaldr haofðo drepet skálden, fór hann til byscops
at segja hónom hvat hann hafðe gert. Byscop sat inne ok sá á bók;
ok áðr Þórvaldr geck inn, kómo tveir blóð-dropar á bókena fyrer
byscope, skilðe byscop þegar, at þat var nockor fyrer-bending. En
er Þórvaldr kom inn til hans, mælte byscop. 'Annat-hvárt hefer10 þú
frameð mann-dráp, ella hefer þú þat í hug þer.' Þórvaldr seger þá
hvat hann hafðe gert. Byscop mælte: 'Hví fórt þú svá með.' Þórvaldr
svarar: 'Ek þolða eige er þeir kaolloðo ockr raga.' Byscop mælte:
'Þat var lítel þol-raun, þó at þeir lyge þat, at þú ætter baorn,
en þú hefer foert orð þeirra á verra veg, þvi at vel15 mætta-ek bera
baorn þín, ef þú ætter nockor. Eige skylde Cristenn maðr sialfr leita
at hefna sín, þó at hann være hatrlega smáðr, heldr þola fyrir Goðs
saker bríxle ok mein-gerðer.' [1267]

6. En er þeir Þórvaldr ok byscop vildo ríða á Hegra-nes-þing, en
heiðner menn fóro í móte þeim, ok baorðo þá grióte, svá at þeir20
naoðo eige framm at fara. Þar efter gerðo menn þá sekja, at heiðnom
laogom. Þá mælte byscop: 'Nú koemr þat framm, er móðor mína dreymðe
forðom daga, at hon þóttez finna vargs-hár í haofðe mér, þvi at nú
ero ver goerver ræker ok rekner sem skoeðer vargar.' [1268]5

En þat sumar eftir Alþinge [1269], saomnoðo haofðingjar liðe, ok riðo
með cc manna, ok ætloðo at brenna þá byscop inne. Þeir aóðo hrossom
sínom áðr þeir riðo heim á boeenn at Loekja-móte. En er þeir skyldo á
bak hlaupa, flugo fuglar upp hiá þeim; við þat fældoz hestar þeirra,
ok fello menn af bake; sumer bruto hendr10 sínar, en sumer foetr;
eða skeindoz á vaópnom sínom. Frá sumom hliópo hrossen, ok fóro þeir
við þat heim aftr. Við þetta her-hlaup urðo þeir byscop ecke varer
fyrr en efter--þá haofðo þeir þriá vetr búet at Loekja-móte. Þeir
bioggo þar vetr síðan. [1270]

7. Efter þat fóro þeir útan: en er þeir kómo til Noregs,15 laógo þeir
í einne haofn: þá kom þar Heðenn af Íslande í þá saomo haofn; ok fór
þegar upp í skóg at hoeggva við. En er Þórvaldr varð varr við þat,
fór hann með þræl sínn, ok lét vega hann þar. En er byscop visse þat,
þá sagðe byscop, at þá munde skilja félag þeirra þat er hann var
heipt-rækr. Byscop fór þá suðr í Saxland,20 ok andaðez þar; ok er
hann maðr sann-heilagr. En Þórvaldr var þá fyrst í kaup-ferðum um hríð.

3. 1. Ádogom Harallz konungs Gorms sonar kom Albertus af Brimom á
Iótland til Ár-óss, ok settez þar á stóla. Þangbrandr hét clerkr hans,
son Vilbaldus greifa af Brimom. En5 þá er Þangbrandr var vaxenn, bad
Hugbertus byscop af Cantara­borg Albertus bróðor sínom til sín. At
þeirre veizlo gaf Hugbertus Alberto giafer, ok aollom faoro-nautom
hans. Þá mælte byscop við Þangbrand: 'Þú ert háttaðr sem riddarar;
því gef-ek þer skiaold; ok er á markaðr cross með líkneske Dróttens
várs--þat merker10 lærdóm þínn.'

2. Lítlu síðarr fann Þangbrandr Óláf Tryggva son í Vindlande. Óláfr
spurðe: 'Hvern dýrkeð-ér Cristner menn á crosse píndan?' Þangbrandr
svarar: 'Dróttenn Várn Jesum Christum.' Konungr spyrr: 'Fyrer hvat
var hann píndr; eða hvat saok gerðe hann?'15 Þá sagðe Þangbrandr
Óláfe konunge innvirðilega frá píning Dróttins Várs ok táknom
Crossens. Konungr falaðe þá skiaoldenn; en Þangbrandr gaf hónom
skiaoldenn, en konungr gaf hónom iam-virðe skialdarens í brendo silfre
ok mælte. 'Ef þú þarft nockors traustz eða hallz, kom þá til mín,
ok mun-ek þá launa þer skiaoldenn.'20

3. Nockoro [1271] síðarr lét Óláfr konungr skíraz í Syllingom á
Írlande. Þangbrandr kauper mey eina Írska ok fagra með silfreno. En
er hann kom heim með hána, þá vilde sá maðr, er Otto enn Unge keisare
hafðe gíslat þangat, taka af hónom meyna; en hann vilde eige lausa
láta. Gíslenn var kappe mikell, ok bauð Þangbrande á pataldr, en
Þangbrandr hafðe sigr, ok drap hann--því mátte Þangbrandr eige vera
í Danmaork, ok fór hann þá til Óláfs konungs5 Tryggva-sonar, ok tók
hann vel við hónom; ok var hann vígðr þar til prestz, ok var hann
hirð-prestr hans um hríð.

4. Óláfr konungr fór af Írlande ok austr í Holm-garð, en ór Holm-garðe
til Noregs, sem ritað er í saogo hans; ok bauð þar Cristne allre
alþýðo. Hann let gera fyrsto kirkjo í ey þeirre er10 Mostr heiter. Þar
lét hann Þangbrand syngja í eynne, ok feck hónom bú ok iarðer. Hann
var eyzlo-maðr mikell ok oerr, ok geck brátt upp fé hans. Þá feck hann
ser lang-skip, ok herjaðe á heiðna menn, ok rænte víða, ok lagðe þat
fé fyrer lið sítt.

5. Óláfr konungr kom í Noreg á andverðre Goe: með hónom15 vóro marger
Íslenzker menn. Sá var einn er Stefner hét; hann var son Þórgils,
Eilífs sonar, Helga sonar Biolu af Kialar-nese. Óláfr konungr sende
Stefne til Íslannz et fyrsta sumar, er hann kom í Noreg, at boða þar
Goðs erende. En er hann kom til Íslannz, þá tóko menn ílla við hónom,
þvi at allr lýðr var þá20 heiðenn á lande her. En hann fór diarflega,
boeðe norðr ok suðr ok kende maonnom rétta trú; en menn skipoðoz lítt
við hans kenningar. Ok er hann sá, at þat hafðe engan fram-gang, þá
tók hann at meiða hof ok haorga, en brióta skurð-goð. Þá saomnoðo
heiðner menn liðe, ok komz hann þá á Kialar-nes nauðolega, ok var
þar með frændom sínom. Skip hans stóð uppe í Gufár-óse; þat tók út um
vetrenn í vatna-vaoxtom ok of-viðre. Þar um kvaóðo heiðner menn þetta:5



    Nú hefer stafn-valinn Stefnes ...


Skip kom á land, ok lítt broteð [1272], ok lét Stefner gera at því
um váret.

6. Þat sumar á Alþinge vas þat í laog teket, at frændr enna Cristno
manna skylldo soekja um þá [1273] goð-laoston, nánare an þriðja10
broeðra, ok firnare an næsta broeðra. Þat sumar vas Stefner sóttr
um Cristne; þá saok sótto þeir frændr hans,--þvi at Cristnen vas þá
kaolloð frænda-skaomm: syner Usvifrs ens Spaka, Þórolfr ok Áskell,
Vandráðr ok Torráðr, sótto hann; en Úspakr vilde oengan hlut at eiga;
en Stefner mælte: 'Ecke mein mun mer verða at15 sekð mínne, en fyrer
þessa saok mun yðr henda mikel ógifta á fárra vetra freste.' Stefner
fór út um sumaret, ok tók Óláfr konungr vel við hónom.

7. Þá er Óláfr konungr spurðe óspekðer þær er Þangbrandr gerðe,
stefnde hann hónom til sín ok bar saker á hann, ok kvað [1274]20 hann
ecke skyldo vera í sínne þiónasto, er hann var ráns-maðr. Þangbrandr
bað konung leggja á hendr ser nockora torvelda sende-ferð. Konungr
mælte: 'Sátter skolo vit, ef þú ferr til Íslannz, ok fær Cristnað
landet.' Þangbrandr mælte: 'Til þess mun-ek hætta.'



4. 1. Þat sumar fór Þangbrandr til Íslannz. Hann kom í5 Alfta-fiaorð
enn nerðra í Sel-vága fyr norðan Melracka-nes. En er menn visso at
Þangbrandr var Cristenn ok hans menn, þá vildo þeir ecke við þá mæla
lannz-mennener, ok eige vísa þeim til hafnar.

2. Þá bió Síðo-Hallr at Á; hann fór til Fliótz-dals; en er hann10 kom
þar, þá fór Þangbrandr at finna hann, ok sagðe hónom at Óláfr konungr
hafðe sendan hann til Hallz, ef hann kvæme í Aust­fiaorðo, ok bað
hann vísa þeim til hafnar, ok veita þeim annan dugnað þann er þeir
þurfto. Hallr lét flytja þá til Alfta-fiarðar ens Syðra í Leiro-vág;
ok sette upp skip þeirra þar er nú15 heiter Þangbranz-hróf; en Hallr
foerðe skip-farmenn heim á tún-vaoll sínn, ok gerðe þar tiald þat er
þeir Þangbrandr vóro í: þar soeng Þangbrandr messo. Enn næsta dag fyrer
Michials messo þá léto þeir Þangbrandr heilagt at nóne; þá var Hallr
þar í tialdeno. Hann spurðe: 'Hví létte þér nú verke?' Þangbrandr
seger:20 'Á morgin er hátíð Michials haofoð-engils.' Hallr spurðe:
'Hverso er hann háttaðr?' Þangbrandr svarar: 'Hann er settr til
þess, at fara mót saólom Cristinna manna.' Síðan sagðe Þangbrandr
mart frá dýrð Goðs Engla. Hallr mælte: 'Voldogr mun sá er þesser
Englar þióna.' Þangbrandr seger: 'Goð gefr þer þessa skilning.'25
Hallr sagðe um kveldet hiúnom sínom: 'Á morgin halda þeir Þangbrandr
heilagt Goðe sínom; ok nú vil-ek, at ér nióteð þess; ok skoloð ér ecke
vinna á morgin; ok skolo ver [1275] nú ganga at siá athæfi Cristinna
manna.' Um morginenn veitte Þangbrandr tíðer í tialde síno, en Hallr
geck ok hiún hans at siá athæfe þeirra; ok5 heyrðe clocna-hlióð, ok
kendo ilm af reykelse; ok sá menn skrýdda goðvef ok purpora. Hallr
spurðe hiún sín, hverso þeim þockaðez [1276] athæfe Cristinna manna;
en þau léto vel yfer. Hallr var skírðr Laugardagenn fyrir Pasca,
oc hiún hans aoll þar í ánne.--Hon er síðan kaolloð Þvátt-á.10

[B* (O): Var Hallr skírðr Þvátt-dagenn fyr Pasca í brunn-loek sínom,
ok allt hans heima-folk. Gaf Þangbrandr prestr þá nafn loek þeim ok
kallaðe Þvátt-á, sem síðan er boerenn við kendr.]

3.  [1277]Um sumaret reið Þangbrandr til Alþinges með Halle. En er
þeir kómo í Skóga-hverfe, þá kaupa heiðner menn at þeim manne15 er
Galdra-Heðenn hét, at hann felde iaorð under Þangbrande. Þann dag er
þeir riðo or Kirkjo-boe frá Surtz, Ásbiarnar sonar, Þórsteins sonar
[1278], Ketils sonar ens Fíflska.--Þeir vóro aller skírðir lang-feðgar.

[B* (O). Þeir lang-feðgar bioggo í Kirkju-boe hverr efter annan,
ok vóru aller Cristner, þvi at þar mátti aldri heiðinn maðr búa.]

Þá fell hestr Þangbranz í iaorð niðr; en hann hlióp af bake ok5
stóð á backanom heill. Þangbrandr skírðe marga menn í faor þeirre,
Gizor enn Hvíta ok Hall í Hauka-dale--hann var þá þré-vetr--ok
Hialta Skeggja son. Þangbrandr flutte skoroliga Goðs oerende á
þinge, ok tóko þá marger menn við trú í Sunnlendinga-fiórðunge,
ok Norðlendinga-fiórðunge. Hann fór efter þinget, ok10 ætlaðe et
eystra til Eyja-fiarðar [1279]. Kom hann norðr í OExar-fiaorð um
sumaret, ok skírðe marga menn í loek þeim hiá Skinna-staoðom, er
Brannz-loekr heiter síðan [1280]; ok at Mý-vatne í Þangbranz polle;
en eige náðe hann lengra framm at fara an til Skialfanda-fliótz fyrir
ríke Eyfirðinga. Hvarf hann þá aftr í Aust-fiaorðo; ok kende15 þar
trú. Þangbrandr fór et syðra þaðan vestr.

4. En þá er Þangbrandr kende trú fyrer maonnom á Íslande; tóko marger
menn þat til at níða hann. Þat gerðe Þórvaldr enn Veile, er bió í Vík
[1281] í Gríms-nese. Hann orte um Þangbrand; ok hann kvað þessa víso
til Ulfs skaldz:20


    Uskelfom skal-ek Ulfe einhendis ...


Þetta kvað Ulfr í móte:


    Teckat-ek syndz þó at sendi sannreynis ...


Vetrliðe skáld orte ok níð um Þangbrand, ok marger aðrer. En þá er
(þeir) kómo vestr í Fliótz-hlíð,--en Goðleifr Ara son af Reykja-hólom
var með hónom--spurðu þeir [1282] at Vetrliðe skáld var5 at torf-skurðe
með húskaorlom sínom. Þeir Þangbrandr fóro til ok vaógo hann þar. Þetta
var kveðet um Goðleif [1283]:


    Ryðfiónar geck reynir randa ...


Þaðan fóro þeir vestr í Gríms-nes, ok fundo Þórvald enn Veila við
Hest-loek, ok vaógo hann þar. Þaðan hurfo þeir aftr, ok vóro með10
Halle annan vetr; en um váret bió Þangbrandr skip sítt.



5. 1. Þat sumarvar Þangbrandr sóttr til sektar um víg þesse. Hann
lét út, ok varð aftr-reka í Borgar-fiaorð í Hitar-á--þar heiter nú
Þangbranz-hróf niðr frá Skipa-hyl; ok þar stendr enn festar-steinn
hans á berge eino.--En er þeir vóro þar15 komner, haofðo heraðs-menn
fund at því, at banna þeim kaup aoll. Þangbrandr kom á Crossa-holt,
ok soeng þar messo, ok reiste þar crossa.

2. Kolr hét maðr er bió í Loekjar-bug; hann átte mat svá mikenn, at
hann visse varla hvat hann skylde af gera. Þangbrandr20 fór þangat,
ok falaðe mat at hónom; en hann vilde engan selja. Þeir tóko matenn,
ok laogðo verð efter. Kolr fór ofan á Hitar-nes [1284], ok kærðe
fyr Skegg-Birne er þar bió. Hann fór með Kol at finna Þangbrand, ok
baóðo hann láta rakna ránet ok boeta fyrer; en Þangbrandr neitaðe
því þverlega. Þeir baorðoz á fitenne ofan frá5 Steins-holte. Þar
fell Skegg-Biaorn ok átta menn aðrer--þar er haugr Skegg-Biarnar á
fitenne.--En aðrer vóro iarðaðer í Land-draugs-holte þar hiá fitenne;
ok sér þar enn goerla kumlen. Tveir menn fello af Þangbrande.

En er Gizorr enn Hvíte spurðe þesse tíðende, bauð hann Þangbrande10
til sín, ok var hann þar enn þriðja vetr.

3. Þann vetr tók út skip Þangbranz or Hitar-á, ok braut miok, ok rak
á land fyr sunnan Kalfa-loek.

4. [B* (N): Steinvaor kom í móte hónom móðer Scalld-Refs, hon boðaðe
Þangbrande heiðne, ok talðe lenge fyr hónom. Þangbrandr15 þagðe meðan
hon talaðe; en talaðe lenge efter ok snere því í villo es hon hafðe
mælt: 'Hefer-þú heyrt þat.' sagðe hon, 'es Þórr bauð Criste á holm, ok
þorðe hann eige at berjaz við Þór?' 'Heyrt hefe-ek,' seger Þangbrandr,
'at Þórr vas ecke nema mold ok aska, ef Goð vilde eige at hann
lifðe.' 'Veiztú,' seger hon,20 'hverr broteð hefer skip þítt?' 'Hvat
seger þú til?' seger hann. 'Þat mon-ec segja her,' seger hon.] [1285]


    Þór brá þvinnils dýre ...
    Braut fyr biollo gæti ...


5.  [1286]Þangbrandr fór um váret vestr á Barða-straond, at finna
Gest enn Spaka. Þar skoraðe Noroenn [1287] berserkr á hann til
holm-gaongo. Þangbrandr iátte því. Berserkrenn mælte: 'Eige muntú þora
at berjaz við mik, ef þú sér íþrótter mínar. Ek geng berom fótom5 um
eld brennanda; ok ek læt fallaz berr á sax-odd mínn; ok sakar mik
hvárke.' Þangbrandr svarar: 'Goð mun því ráða.' Þangbrandr vígðe
eldenn, en gerðe cross-mark yfer saxeno. Berserkrenn brann á fótom
er hann óð eldenn. En er hann fell á saxet, stóð þat í gegnom hann;
ok feck hann af því bana. Þesso10 faognoðo marger góðer menn þó at
heiðner være. Þá lét Gestr prim-signaz; ok nockorer viner hans.

6. Þangbrandr fór vestan ok lét boeta skip sítt. Þat kallaðe hann
Iárn-meis. Hann siglðe suðr um fiaorð til Hafnar, ok lagðe inn
í vágenn, ok lá þar til hafs--þat heiter síðan Iárn-meis-haofðe15
millim Hafnar ok Belgs-holtz.--Hann fór útan um sumaret til Óláfs
konungs í Þróndheime.


6. 1. Um sumaret á þinge vas mikel umbroeða um trúna, es Þangbrandr
boðaðe, ok goðlaostoðo þá sumer menn miok. En þeir es skírðer vóro
ámælto goðonom; ok vas at því sveitar-draóttr mikell. Þá kvað Hialte
Skeggja son kviðling þenna at Laogberge:5


    Vil ek hauga Goð geyja: grey þicke mer Freyja:
    Æ man [1288] annat-tveggja Óðinn grey eða Freyja.


Under þann kviðling tók Rún-ólfr Goðe, son Ulfs, Iorundar sonar
Goða, ok sótte Hialta um goð-gaó. Hann lýste meirr í því ríke
sítt ok þrá-lynde an réttlæte, þvi at hann gat eige haldet dómenom
[1289]10 fyrer vin-sælð Hialta, fyrr an hann sette á OExar-ár-brú,
ok lét verja brúar-sporðana [1290] [1291] báða með vaópnum. Þá varð
einge til at reifa málet fyrr an Þórbiaorn, son Þórkels or Goðdaolom,
settesc í dómenn ok reifðe málet. Í þeim dóme vas Hialte doemðr sekr
fior­baugs-maðr um goð-gaó.15

2. Þat sumar fór hann útan á því skipe es hann hafðe goera láteð heima
þar í Þiórs-ár-dale, ok foerðe efter Rang-aó enne vestre til sióvar
skipet. Ok es þeir fóro efter aónne ofan, þá rann maðr efter landeno,
ok hafðe í hende spiót ok skiaold. Hialte mælte til hans:


    Þer liggr halms-visk þar es hiartað skylde.20


Sá skaut spióteno til Hialta; en Hialte greip skiaolld, ok kom þar
í spióteð. Menn Hialta hliópo [1292] á land ok tóko hann, ok spurðo
hverr hann være. Hann kvazc Narfe heita, ok kvað Rúnólf hafa sendan
[1293] sik til haofoðs Hialta, ok skylde hann svá leysa sik undan
sekðom. Hialte mælte: 'Kann ek þer betra ráð; far þú útan með mer, ok
mon-ek goera þik syknan [1294].' Hialte fór útan, ok kom um hausteð
norðr í Þróndheim á fund Óláfs konungs. Þá kom ok útan af Íslande
Gizorr Hvíte mágr hans.5

3. Óláfr konungr hafðe cristnað Hálogaland, ok kom hann til Níðar-óss
um hausteð. Þar vóro þá marger Íslenzker menn þeir-es fyr skipom
réðo. Þeir stýrðo eino skipe, Ceartan Óláfs son Pá, ok Kalfr
Ásgeirs son, ok Bolle Þórleiks son: þar stýrðe ok Halldórr síno
skipe son Goðmundar ens Ríka: ok Kolbeinn son Þórðar10 Freys-goða:
ok Svertingr son Rúnolfs Goða; Hallfroeðr Óttars son; ok Þórarenn
Nefjúlfs son--þesser vóro aller heiðner. Þeir laógo fyre boenom, ok
ætloðo suðr fyr land; en þeim gaf eige áðr konungr koeme [1295] norðan.

4. Þat vas einn góðan veðr-dag, at menn fóro á sund ór boenom;15 ok
saó þeir es á skiponom vóro, at einn maðr vas myklo betr sund-foerr an
aðrer. Bolle Þórleiks son mælte við Ceartan frænda sínn, 'Hví reyner
þú eige sund við þann enn foera mann?' Ceartan mælte: 'Ecke vil ek
við hann þreyta.' 'Hvar kom kapp þítt þá?' seger Bolle, ok kastaðe
klæðonom. Þá hlióp Ceartan upp ok af20 klæddesc, ok bað Bolla vesa
kvirran [1296]. Ceartan hlióp á sund, ok lagðesc at mann-enom, ok
foerðe hann niðr, ok hellt niðre um hríð. Efter þat kómo þeir upp,
ok foerðe Ceartan hann niðr annat sinn. Ok es Ceartan vilde upp,
tók sá Ceartan, ok hélt hónom niðre um hríð. Et þriðja sinn foerðe
sá Ceartan niðr, ok hélt hónom svá lenge niðre, at hónom hélt við
kafnan. Þá laogðosc þeir til lannz, ok spurðe þesse maðr Ceartan, ef
hann visse við5 hvern hann hafðe þreytt sundet. Hann kvazc þat eige
vita. Hann gaf Ceartane skallaz-skickjo, ok kvað hann þá vita mundo,
við hvern hann hafðe þreytt sundet. Ceartan varð víss at þesse maðr
vas Óláfr konungr. Hann þackaðe hónom soemelega giaofna. Heiðner menn
léto ílla yfer því es Ceartan hafðe giafar þeget af10 kononge.

Michials-messo dag þá gengo marger Íslenzker menn at heyra tíðer, ok
siá sið Cristenna manna. Ok es þeir kómo aftr, roeddo þeir um með ser,
hvern veg þeim hefðe virzc þeirra athæve, Ceartan lét vel yfer; en
fáer aðrer. Konongr varð þess skiótt víss,15 ok sende efter Ceartane,
ok spurðe ef hann vilde taka við Cristne. Ceartan kvað hann goera
mega svá, at hann munde því eige nítta. Konungr spyrr hvat hann mæler
til. 'At ér fáet mer eige minna [1297] sóma her an ek á vón á Íslande,
þó at ek koma þar eige.' Konungr iátte því. Ceartan vas þá skírðr,
ok vas í boðe konungs meðan20 hann vas í hvíta-vaóðom.

[B* (O) om. the whole extraneous Ceartan episode, but treats § 3 at
greater length:--

Nú verðr fyrst at segja frá þeim Íslenzkom maonnom, es þetta sama
sumar kómo útan af Íslande til Níðar-óss, lítlo áðr an Óláfr konungr
kom norðan af Hálogalande. Þar vas einn maðr Hall­dórr, son Goðmundar
ens Ríka af Maoðro-vaollom; annarr Kolbeinn son Þórðar Freys-goða,
bróðer Brenno-Flosa; þriðe Svertingr son Rúnolfs Goða; þar réð ok
fyre skipe Þórarenn Nefjulfs-son--þésser5 vóro aller heiðner; ok
marger aðrer, bæðe ríker ok óríker. Þesser menn sem nú vóro nefnder,
hverr með sína skip-verja, leitaðu til braut-siglingar, þegar (es)
Óláfr konungr vas komenn norðan af Hálogalande; þvi at þeim vas sagt,
at konungr nauðgaðe alla menn til Cristne. Laogðo heiðingjar þegar
út or aónne, es konungr10 vas komenn til boejarens; siglðo þeir út
efter firðe. Því næst geck þeim veðr í þrá, ok rak þá inn aftr under
Níðar-holm. Þetta vas sagt Óláfe konunge, at Íslendingar laógo út
under Holme nockorom skipom, ok vóro aller heiðner, ok vildo flýja
fund hans. Konungr sende þegar menn út til þeirra, ok bannaðe þeim
braut-ferð, ok15 bað þá leggja inn til boejar. Þeir gaorðo svá;
en baóro ecke af skipom sínom.--Í þann tíma kómo af Íslande gaofger
menn ok mikels-verðer, þeir es við Cristne haofðo teket af Þangbrande
preste, Gizorr Hvíte ok Hialte Skeggja son or Þiórsár-dale (here
follows the episode of Hialte).]20


7. 1. Í því bile kom Þangbrandr prestr af Íslande til konungs, ok
sagðe hvern fiánd-skap menn haofðo þar við hann lýst; ok kallaðe
oenga vaón at Cristne moende þar við gangasc. Þá varð konungr svá
reiðr, at hann lét taka marga Íslenzka menn ok setja í iárn [1298];
hét sumom drápe, en sumom meizlom; en sumer vóro rænter; sagðe
konungr at hann skylde þá gialda þeim þat hverso [1299] úvirðilega
feðr þeirra tóko á Íslande hans oerendom. Þeir Hialte ok Gizorr
baóðo þá fyrer maonnom, sagðo [1300] at konungr hafðe þat mællt,
at menn skyldo ecki þat hafa til saka goert áðr, ef þeir vilde5
skírasc láta, at eige skylde frið hafa. Gizorr talðe frændseme við
konung--Álof, móðer hans, vas dótter Baoðvars hersess, Víkinga-Kára
sonar; en Ástríðr, móðer Óláfs konungs, vas dótter Eiriks, bróðor
Baoðvars--Gizorr sagðe at hónom þótte vaón at Cristne moende við
gangasc á Íslande, ef raóðom være at faret. 'En Þangbrandr10 fór
þar sem her heldr úspaklega; drap hann þar menn nockora; ok þótte
maonnom hart at taka þat af útlendom manne.' Óláfr konungr seger:
'Aller menn skolo frið hafa, ef it [1301] Hialte bindezc fyrer, at
Cristnen gangesc við á Íslande; en taka mon-ek í gísling þá menn es mer
þickja bazt menter af Íslendingom, þar til15 es reynt es hverso þetta
mál ferr.'--Til þessa nefnde konungr Ceartan Óláfs son; Halldór son
Goðmundar Ríka; Kolbein son Þórðar Freys-Goða, bróðor Brenno-Flosa;
Sverting son Rúnolfs Goða. Þá mælte maðr, es Svertings vas geteð:
'Úverðogr es Svertingr þess, at Hialte veite hónom í orðom, þvi
[1302] at faðer hans sótte20 Hialta um sakleyse.' Þangbrandr svarar:
'Oft mun þat lýsasc, at Hialte mon betr hafa, an þeir es til mótz
[1303] ero; ok takeð ér, herra, vel þá Hialta ok Gizor þvi at þeir
launa oft góðo ílla hlute.' Þesso iátto þeir Hialte ok Gizorr, at
flytja konungs oerende á Íslande. En efter þat vóro aller Íslenzker
menn leyster ok skírðer, þeir sem þar vóro.

2. Óláfr konungr veitte Hallfroeðe goð-sifjar, þvi at hann vilde5 eige
láta skírasc ella--þá kallaðe konungr hann Vandræða-skálld, ok gaf
hónom sverð at nafn-feste. Gizorr ok Hialte [1304] vóro með konunge
um vetrenn, ok sat Gizorr fyr á-dryckjo konungs, innarr an lender
menn. Með konunge vóro ok gíslar ener Íslenzko í góðo yferlæte.10


8. 1. Um váret bioggo þeir Hialte ok Gizorr skip sítt til Íslannz;
marger menn laotto þess Hialta; en hann gaf ser ecki um þat. [1305]

Þat sumar fór Óláfr konungr or lande suðr til Vindlannz. Þá sende
hann ok Leif Eiriks son til Groena-lannz at boða þar trú.15 Þá fann
Leifr Vínland et Góða. Hann fann ok menn á skip-flake í hafe--því
vas hann kallaðr Leifr enn Heppne.

2. Hialte ok Gizorr [1306] kómo þann dag fyr Durholma-ós es
Brenno-Flose reið um Arnar-stacks-heiðe til Alþingess: þá spurðe hann
af þeim maonnom es til þeirra haofðo roet, at Kolbeinn, bróðer hans,20
vas tekenn í gísling; ok allt um oerende þeirra Hialta; ok sagðe hann
þau tíðende til Alþingess. Þeir tóko þann sama dag Vest­manna-eyjar,
ok laogðo skip sítt við Hoerga-eyre: þar baóro þeir faot sín á land,
ok kirkjo-við þann es Óláfr konungr hafðe láteð hoeggva [1307]; ok
mælte svá fyrer, at kirkjona skylde þar reisa sem þeir skyte bryggjom
á land. Áðr kirkjan vas reist, vas hlutað um5 hvaórom-megen vágsens
standa skylde; ok hlautzc fyr norðan--þar vóro áðr blót ok hoergar. En
er þeir haofðo dvalzc tvá daga í eyjonom, ok reistan laup kirkjonnar,
þá fóro þeir þaðan, ok tóko Eyja-sand [1308] þann sama dag. Þat
vas þann dag es menn riðo á þing. Þeir fengo oengan farar-greiða né
reið-skióta fyr austan Rang-aó;10 þvi at þar saóto þing-menn Rúnolfs í
hverjo húse. Þeir gengo þar til es þeir kómo í Háf til Skeggja Ásgautz
[1309] sonar; hann feck þeim hesta til þings; en Þórvaldr, son hans,
vas áðr heiman riðenn, es átte Col-torfo systor Hialta. En es þeir
kómo í Laugar-dal, fengo þeir þat af Hialta, at hann vas efter með
tolfta mann, þvi at hann15 vas sekr fiorbaugs-maðr.

3. Þeir Gizorr riðo þar til es þeir kómo til Vellan-kotlo við
Olfus-vatn: þá goerðo þeir orð til Alþingess, at viner þeirra ok
venzla-menn skyldo ríða í mót þeim. Þeir haofðo þá spurt at óviner
þeirra ætloðo at verja þeim þing-vaollenn. En áðr þeir riðe20 frá
Vellan-kaotlo, kómo þeir Hialte þar; ok vóro þá frændr þeirra ok
viner komner í móte þeim; riðo þeir þá á þing með miklom flocke,
ok til búðar Ásgríms Elliða-Gríms sonar, systor-sonar Gizorar. Þá
hliópo ener heiðno menn saman með al-væpne; ok hafðe stór(um) [1310]
ner at þeir mundo berjasc; en þó vóro þeir es skirra vildo vandræðom,
þó at eige være Cristner. Þórmóðr hét prestr, sá es Óláfr konungr
hafðe fenget þeim Hialta ok Gizore.5 Hann soeng messo um dagenn efter
á Giá-backa upp frá [1311] búð Vest­firðinga. Þaðan gengo þeir til
Laogbergs: þar vóro siau menn skrýdder. Þeir haofðo crossa tvá, þá
es nú ero í Skarðe [1312] eno Eystra [1313]: merker annarr hæð Óláfs
konungs; en annarr hæð Hialta Skeggja sonar.10

4. At Laogberge vas allr þing-heimr. Þeir Hialte haofðo reykelse á
glóð, ok kende svá í gegn vinde sem forvindis ilmenn: þá baóro þeir
Hialte ok Gizorr upp oerende sín vel ok skorolega; en þat undraðo
menn hverso snialler þeir vóro, ok hverso vel þeim mæltesc. En svá
mikel ógn fylgðe orðom þeirra, at enger óviner15 þeirra þorðo at tala
móte þeim. En þat goerðesc þar, at annarr maðr at aoðrom nefnde ser
vátta, ok saogðosc hvárer or laogom við aðra, ener Cristno menn ok
ener heiðno.

5. Þá kom maðr hlaupande á þinget [1314] ok sagðe, at iarð-elldr
vas upp komenn í Olfuse, ok munde hann hlaupa á boe Þóroz Goða.20
Þá tóko heiðner menn til orðz: 'Eige es undr í, at goðen reiðesc
taolom slíkom.' Þá mælte Snorre Goðe: 'Um hvat reiddosc goðen þá es
her brann hraunet es nú staondo ver á?' [1315]

Efter þat gengo menn frá til Laogberge.

6. Þá baóðo ener Cristno menn at Síðo-Hallr skylde segja laog þeirra
upp, þau es Cristnenne skyldo fylgja. Hallr keypte haolfo5 hundraðe
silfrs at Þórgeire Goða, es þá hafðe Laogsaogo, at hann segðe upp
laog hvár-tvegge, Cristen ok heiðen; ok vas hann þá enn eige skírðr.

[B* (O) here adds--(Ok segiz svá at Hallr gaf hónom til halft c silfrs)
með þeim skildaga, at hann skylde hafa þau þriú orð í10 fram-burðe
laganna, sem þeir Hialte, Gizorr, ok Hallr [1316] saogðo hónom fyrer,
hverso sem hann skipaðe aoðrom laogom. Þat vas et fyrsta orð, at
aller menn skyldo Cristner vesa á Íslande ok skírn taka þeir es áðr
vóru ó-skírðer: þat var annat, at óheilog skyldu vesa hof aoll ok
skurðgoð: þat vas et þriðja, at fiorbaugs-garð15 skylde varða blót
aoll, ef vátt-næmd yrðe.]

En þá es menn kómo í búðer lagðesc Þórgeirr niðr ok breidde feld
á haofoð ser, ok lá allan dag ok um nóttena, ok annan dagenn til
iamn-lengðar.

7. Ener heiðno menn haofðo þá stefno fiolmenna, ok tóko þat20 ráð,
at blóta tveimr maonnom or hverjom fiórðunge; ok héto á heiðen goð
til þess, at þau léte eige Cristne ganga yfer landet.

Þeir Hialte ok Gizorr aótto aðra stefno við Cristna menn; ok létosc
þeir vilja hafa ok mann-blót iam-fiolmennt sem ener heiðno. Þeir
mælto svá: 'Heiðingjar blóta enom verstom maonnom, ok hrinda þeim
fyrer biaorg eða hamra; en ver skolom velja at mann-kostom menn, ok
kalla sigr-giaof við Drótten várn Jesum Christum; skolo ver lifa því
betr ok synðvarr-ligar an áðr: ok mono vit Gizorr ganga til fyrer
várn fiórðung sigr-giafarennar.' En fyrer Aust-firðinga-fiórðung5
gengo þeir til, Hallr af Síðo, ok Þórleifr or Crossa-vík fyr norðan
Reyðar-fiaorð, hann vas stiúp-son Ásbiarnar Loðin-haofða, bróðer
[1317] Þórarens or Seyðar-firðe: Ingileif vas móðer þeirra.--Hónom
hafðe Digr-Ketill stefnt um Cristne at ráðe Brodd-Helga: þá goerðe
veðr svá íllt, at Ketill varð því feginn at hann kom til10 Þórleifs
um kveldet, ok hafðe þar góðan beina; af því féll stefnan.--En or
Norðlendinga-fiórðunge gengo þeir til sigr-giafarennar, Hlenne enn
Gamle, ok Þórvarðr son Spak-Baoðvars. En or Vestfirðinga-fiórðunge,
Gestr Oddleifs [1318] son. Þá vas enge annarr til. Þat líkaðe þeim
Hialta ok Gizore ílla. Þá tók til orða Ormr15 Coðrans son--hann
vas vistom á Gils-backa, þvi at Hermundr Illoga son átte Gunnhilde
dóttor hans: 'Verða munde maðr til þessa, es Þórvaldr bróðer mínn enn
Víðfaorle være samlendr við mik. En nú mun ek til ganga ef ér vilet
við mer taka.' Þeir iaótto því; ok vas hann þá skírðr þegar.20

8. En um dagenn efter settesc Þórgeirr upp, ok goerðe orð í búðer
at menn genge til Laogbergs. Ok es menn kómo til Laogbergs, mælte
hann--at hónom þótte þá komet í ú-vent efne á landeno, es menn skolo
eige hafa ein laog á lande her; ok bað at menn skyldo þat eige goera;
sagðe at þar af mundo goerasc bar­dagar ok ófriðr; ok munde þat ryðja
til land-auðnar. Hann sagðe ok frá því, at konungar þeir, es annarr
hét Dagr--sá vas í Danmaorko--en sá hét Tryggve es var í Norege: þeir
haofðo lenge haldet stríð miðlim sín; ok þar til es lannz-menn naómo þá
raóðom5 or hvaóro-tveggja ríkeno; ok goerðo frið miðlim þeirra, svá at
þeir vildo eige. En þat ráð gafsc svá, at þeir sendosc giafar á miðlim
á fára vetra freste; ok hélsc þeirra vingan meðan þeir lifðo báðer. 'Ok
þickc mer þat ráð, at láta þá eige ráða, es her gangasc með mesto
kappe í móte; ok miðlom svá maól miðlim þeirra, at hvárer-tveggja10
hafe nockot til síns máls. En ver haofom aller ein laog ok einn sið;
því at þat mon satt vesa, ef ver slítom laoogen, þá slíto ver friðenn.'

Þórgeirr lauk svá taolonne, at hvárer-tveggjo iaótto því, at þau laog
skylde halda es hann réðe upp at segja.15

9. Þá vas þat upp-saga Þórgeirs, at aller menn skyldo vera skírðer á
Íslande, ok trua á einn Goð: en um barna út-burð ok hrossa-át skolo
haldasc en forno laog. Menn skyldo blóta á laun, ef vilde; en varða
fiorbaugs-garð ef vaóttom koeme við.--Sú heiðne vas af teken nockorom
vetrom síðarr. [1319]20

[B* (N).]--'Hann sagðe þá upp um Dróttins-daga-halld, ok faosto-daga,
Ióla-daga, ok Pasca-daga, ok allra enna stoersto hátíða.'

10. Aller Norðlendingar ok Sunnlendingar vóro skírðer í Reykja-laugo
í Laugar-dale, es þeir riðo af þinge; þvi at þeir vildo eige fara í
kalt vatn. Hialte mælte, es Rúnolfr vas skírðr:


    'Gaomlom kenno ver nú goða at geifla á salte. [1320]'


Þat sumar vas skírðr allr þing-heimr es menn riðo heim. Flester5
Vestan-menn vóro skírðer í Reykja-laugo í Syðra-Reykjar-dale. Snorre
Goðe kom mesto á leið við Vestfirðinga. [1321]

11. Sumar þetta es Cristne vas í laog teken á Íslande, vas liðet frá
Hollgan várs Herra Jesu Christi m vetra.

12. Þat sumar hvarf Óláfr konungr af Orme'nom Langa suðr10 (við)
Svolðr, iiij Idus Septembris. Þá hafðe hann vereð konungr at Norege
v vetr. Efter hann tók ríke Eirikr iarl Hákonar son.


9. 1. Þeir Þórvaldr Coðrans son ok Stefner Þórgils son fundosc efter
hvarf Óláfs konungs. Þeir fóro báðer saman víða um heimenn, ok allt út
í Iorsala-heim; ok þaðan til15 Mikla-garz, ok svá til Coenu-garðz et
eystra efter Dnepr [1322]. Þórvaldr andaðesc í Ruzia skamt [1323] frá
Palltesciu. Þar es hann grafenn í fialle eino at kirkjo Johans [1324]
Baptiste; ok kalla þeir hann helgan. Svá seger Brandr enn Víðfaorle:


    Hefi-ek þar ... komeð es Þórvalde20
    Coðrans syne Christr hvílðar lér:
    þar es hann grafenn í há-fialle
    upp at Dnapre í [1325] Iohans kirkju.


2. Stefner fór þá norðr í Danmaork. En es hann kom í Danmaork, kvað
hann víso þessa:


    Monkað-ek nefna--nær man-ek stefna;5
    Niðr-biúgt es nef á níðinge--
    Þann es Svein konung sveik or lande,
    Ok Tryggvason á tálar dró.


Á þeirre víso þóttesc Sigvalde iarl kenna mark sítt; ok fyrer þá saok
lét hann drepa Stefne.10

Svá hefer Are enn Gamle sagt:--


10. 1. Gizorr enn Hvíte bió í Haofða áðr hann goerðe boe í
Scála-holte, ok foerðe þangat bú sítt. Hann lagðe allan hug á at
styrkja Cristnena. Hann sende Ísleif son sínn suðr í Saxland, ok geck
þar í scóla í borg þeirre er Herfurða [1326] heiter.15 En es hann
kom til Íslannz, feck hann Dollo Þórvallz dóttor, ok vas þeirra son
Gizorr, ok Teitr enn Margláte í Hauka-dale, ok Þórvaldr.

2. Her vóro fyrst útlender byscopar, ok kendo kenningar.

En es lannz-menn visso hverso ágætr clerkr Ísleifr vas, báðo
landz-menn hann [1327],20 at hann foere útan ok léte vígjasc til
byscops; ok þat veitte hann þeim. Þá vas hann L. at aldre es hann
vas til byscops vígðr. Þá vas Leo nonus pp. Þá vas hann enn næsta
vetr eftr í Norege, ok fór síðan til Íslannz, ok vas iiij vettr ok
xx byscop. Hann lærðe marga ágæta menn ok lét vígja til presta; en
af þeim urðo síðan ij byscopar, Joan Ogmundar [1328] son enn Helge,
ok Kolr Víkverja byscop. Ísleifr byscop andaðesc í Scálaholte iij
nonas Iulij. Þat vas á Dróttens dege. Þá hafðe hann iiij vetr ok xx
byscop veret. Þá vóro lxxx vetra liðner frá5 hvarfe Óláfs konungs
Tryggva sonar. Are enn Fróðe stóð yfer grefte hans xij vetra gamall,
es flest hefer sagt frá þessom tíðendom es her ero ritoð.

3. Efter andlát Ísleifs byscops, báðo landz-menn Gizor son hans,
at hann skylde vígjasc til byscops. Hann fór útan, ok vas vígðr
til byscops ij vetrom efter andlát Ísleifs byscops, á dogom Óláfs
konungs Kyrra Noregs konungs. Þá vas10 Gregorius septimus [1329]
pp. í Roma. Gizorr vas enn nesta vetr efter víxlo sína í Danmork;
en fór til Íslannz it nesta sumar efter. En es hann hafðe einn vetr
á Íslande veret tók Márkus Skeggja son Logsogo.--Hann hefer vitrastr
veret Log(sogo) manna á Íslande annarr an Skafte.

4. Gizorr byscop vas svá ást-sæll af landz-monnom, at hverr maðr vilde
hans15 boðe ok banne hlýða. En af ást-sælð Gizorar byscops ok um-tolom
Sæmundar prestz ens Fróða--es baztr clerkr hefer veret á Íslande--ok
umbráðom Márkus Logsogo-mannz, ok [1330] fleire hofðingja vas þat
í log teket, at aller menn tolðo ok virðo fé sítt, ok svorðo eið at
rétt være, hvárt sem vas í londom eða lausom aurom, ok goerðo tiund
af. Þat es miket mark til þess hverso lannz-menn vóro hlýðner20 þeim
manne es því kom til leiðar, at allt landet vas virt, ok allt fé þat
es á því vas, ok log-teket at svá skylde vesa meðan landet være bygt.

5. Gizorr byscop lagðe ok log á þat, at stóll byscops þess es á Íslande
være, skylde vesa í Scála-holte; ok lagðe þar til stólsens landet
heima þar, ok morg onnor auðæve, bæðe í lande ok lausom eyre. En þá
es hónom þótte sá staðr orðenn svá25 ríkr sem hann vilde, þá gaf hann
meirr an fiórðung byscops-dóms síns til þess at heldr være ij byscops
stólar á Íslande an einn; svá sem Norðlendingar báðo hann.

6. En hann hafðe áðr láteð telja boendr alla á Íslande; ok vóro þá:
Í Austfirðinga fiórðunge dcc heil; en í Sunnlendinga fiórðunge dd;
en í Vestfirðinga fiórðunge30 ix c; en í Norðlendinga fiórðunge xii
(c)--ok vóro þeir einer talðer es þingfarar-kaupe átto at gegna.

7. Þá es Gizorr byscop hafðe xxv vetr veret byscop, þá tók Gunnarr
[1331] Ulfheðins son logsogo; en Márkus vas þá andaðr. [1332] Ok
et fyrsta sumar es hann sagðe log upp, vas nýmæle þat goert, at um
vetrenn efter skylde rita logen at Hafliða Márs35 sonar, ok umbráðe
Bergþórs ok annarra vitra manna; ok skyldo þeir goera nýmæle þau oll,
es þeim þoette þau betre an en forno log; ok skylde þau segja upp
et næsta sumar efter; ok þau oll haldasc, es meire hlutr manna mælte
eige móte. Þá vas ritaðr Víg-slóðe ok mart annat í logom, ok leset upp
um sumaret efter í Logrétto; ok líkaðe þat ollom vel.--Þá vas byscop
fertoegr es hann vas til byscops vígðr. En40 þá es hann hafðe iiij vetr
ok xx byscop veret, vas Joan [1333] vígðr til byscops son Ogmundar
ok Þórgerðar, Egils dóttor, Hallz sonar af Síðo. Þá hafðe Ioan iiij
vetr ens setta tigar. Hann vas fyrstr byscop at Hólom í Hialta-dale.


8. Gizorr byscop friðaðe svá vel landet, at þá urðo engar stór-deilor
með haofðingjom; en vápna-burðr lagðesc miok niðr. Þá45 vóro flester
virðinga-menn lærðer, ok vígðer til presta, þó at haofðingjar være. Svá
sem vas:

Hallr, suðr [1334], Teitz son í Hauka-dale; ok Sæmundr enn Fróðe;
Magnús Þórðar son í Reykja-holte; Simon Iorundar son í Boee; Goðmundr
son Brannz í Hiarðar-holte; Are enn Fróðe; Inge-mundr5 Einars son
á Hólom.

Ketill, norðr, Þórsteins son á Maoðro-vaollom; ok Ketill Goðmundar
son; Jóan prestr Þórvarz son.--Ok marger aðrer [1335], þó at eige
sé ritaðer.


9. Gizorr byscop lét vígja Þórlák, son Rúnolfs Þórláks sonar,
til byscops at ser10 lifanda--þá vas Þórlákr ii vetrom meirr an
þrítoegr--Gizorr byscop andaðesc í Scála-holte þá es hann hafðe veret
byscop xxx [1336] ára ok vi ár. Þat vas xxx nátta síðarr an Þórlákr
byscop vas vígðr. Þat vas enn þriðja dag í viko, v kal. Junij. Á
því áre andaðesc Paskalis Papa, ok Kirjalax Girkja [1337] konungr;
ok Balldvin Iorsala konungr; ok Arnaldus Patriarki í Jerusalem;
ok Philippus Svia15 konungr. Þá hafðe Ísland bygt veret cc vetra
tólf-roeð [1338], annat í heiðne, en annat í Cristne. Þá vas liðet
frá Holldgan Dróttens várs Herra Jesu Christi m c xviij ár.


10. Þá es Gizorr byscop andaðesc vóro þesser mester haofðingjar
á Íslande:

Hafliðe Márs son, norðr; ok syner Ásbiarnar, Arnórs sonar, í20
Skaga-firðe; Þórgeirr Halla son; ok Ketill prestr Þórsteins son.

En austr, Gizorr Einars son; Sigmundr Þórgils son;--hann andaðesc á
því Áre í Rúm-faor.

En suðr, Hallr Teitz son; Skúle Egils son.

En vestr, Styrmer Hreins son; Halldórr Egils son; Þórgils25 Odda
[1339] son; Þórðr Gils son; Þórðr Þórvallz son í Vatz-firðe.








Here beginneth the Story of the Christianising [of Iceland].

Now beginneth how Christendom came to Iceland--

1. 1. There was a man named Thor-wald, son of Codran, brother's son
of Atle the Strong. They [Codran and Atle] were sons of Eilif Erne,
the son of Bard o' Al, the son of Cetil the Fox, the son of Skide
the Old. Cod-ran dwelt at Gil-water in Water-dale, and was a man
of birth. Thor-wald his son went abroad, and was first a-warring;
but the share of the booty that he won he laid out in ransoming men
taken captive in war, all that he did not need to keep for his own
maintenance; and for such doings he became renowned and well-beloved.

Thor-wald travelled far in the Southern lands. South in Sax-land he
met a bishop called Frederick, and took baptism and the true faith at
his hands, and was with him for a while. Thor-wald asked the bishop
to journey with him to Iceland, to baptize his father and mother
and those of the rest of his kindred who would follow his counsel,
and the bishop granted it to him.

2. Bishop Frederick and Thor-wald came to Iceland in the summer when
the land had been settled one-hundred-and-seven winters. Thor-kell
Moon held the speakership at that time.

And the mightiest chiefs in the land at that time were Ey-wolf
Wal-gerd's son, in the North, and Wiga-Glum, Arnor Carline-neb,
Thor-ward son of Bead-war the Sage, Starre and his brothers in
God-dales, Thor-kell Crafla in Water-dale; and in the West were these:
Are Mar's son, As-gar Cnatt's son, Ey-wolf the Gray, Guest the Sage,
An-laf Peacock, Slaughter Styr, Snorre gode who was then 18 years old,
and had taken up his abode at Holy-fell, Thor-stan Egil's son. And
in the South, Illuge the Red, Thor-kell Moon and Thor-ord the priest,
Gizor the White, As-grim the son of Ellida-grim, Sholto Scegge's son,
Wal-gard o' Temple, Run-wolf Wolf's son, and the sons of Ern-ulf o'
Shaw. And in the East, the sons of Thord the gode or priest of Frey,
Hall o' Side, Helge As-beorn's son, Wiga-Bearne, and Geite.

3. It is told that when the bishop and Thor-wald journeyed into
the North-land-men's Quarter, and Thor-wald preached the faith to
men,--for the bishop did not understand the Northern tongue at that
time, but Thor-wald set forth God's message boldly, but most men were
little moved by their words,--that Ean-wend the Christian, the son
of Thor-gils of Reek-dale, the son of Grenjad, received the faith,
and Hlenne the Old, the son of Orm Mail-back, and Thor-ward at Ridge
in Shelty-dale, the son of Bead-war the Sage, and Ey-wolf Wal-gerd's
son, had himself prime-signed.

4. The bishop and Thor-wald, with thirteen men, passed the first winter
with Codran at Gil-water. Thor-wald asked his father to be baptized,
but he was in no haste to do so. There stood a stone at Gil-water,
which he and his kindred had been wont to worship, saying that their
Steward or Ancestor dwelt therein. Codran said that he would not let
himself be baptized till he knew which was the mightier, the bishop
or the ancestor in the stone. Whereupon the bishop went to the stone
and sang over it till it burst asunder, and then Codran thought he
could perceive that the ancestor was overcome. Then he let himself
be baptized and all his household with him, save Orm, his son, who
would not receive the faith, and went away southward into Borg-frith
and bought him land in Hwan-eyre.

5. Orm had to wife Thor-ware, the daughter of Ozor and of Bera, the
daughter of Egil, the son of Scald-Grim. Their daughter was Yng-wild,
whom Her-mund Illuge's son had to wife. Afterwards Orm had to wife
Geir-laug daughter of Stan-mood o' Deep-dale. Their daughter was Bera,
whom Scule Thor-stan's son had to wife.


2. 1. The bishop and Thor-wald took up their abode at Beck-moot in
Withe-dale, and dwelt there four winters. They journeyed far and
wide in Iceland preaching the faith. The bishop and Thor-wald were
harvest-guests with An-laf at Hawk-gill in Water-dale. Thor-kell Crafla
was there at the time, and many other men; and there came thither
two bear-sarks, both named Hawk; they would be always cowing people,
and went about howling, and walked or waded through fires. Then men
asked the bishop to overcome them. Whereupon the bishop hallowed
the fire before they walked through, and then they got much burnt,
and thereupon men set upon them and slew them, and their bodies were
borne up to the fell hard by the gill that was afterwards called
Hawk-gill. Thereupon Thor-kell Crafla had himself prime-signed,
but many men who heard these tidings were baptized.

2. Thor-wald and the bishop journeyed into the West-frith-men's Quarter
to preach the faith. About the time of the All-thing they came to
the house of Thor-arin Fylsenni at Hwam or Combe, and he was at the
All-moot at the time, but his wife Frid-gerd, the daughter of Thord o'
Head, and their son Scegge were at home. Thor-wald preached the faith
there before men; but Frid-gerd was in the temple sacrificing all
the while, and each of them could hear what the other said, and the
boy Scegge was laughing at them. Then Thor-wald recited these verses:--



    I walked with the halidom, no man listened to me,
    I got mockery from the priest's son, the sprinkler of the
    divining-rod,
    The old house-wife shrieked against me ...
    The priestess, God lame her ...


        [See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 79.]


Men would not let them be baptized by reason of their words
in the West-frith-men's Quarter as far as is known, but in the
North-land-men's Quarter many men abandoned their sacrifices and
broke their idols, and some would not pay temple-toll.

3. Thor-ward, son of Bod-war or Bead-were the Sage, let build a church
at his dwelling in Ridge, which greatly displeased them that were
heathen. There was a man called Clauve, the son of Thor-wald, son of
Ref of Bard. He was a chief. He was much displeased with Thor-wald for
what he had done; and he went to see Arn-grim, Thor-ward's brother,
and gave him his choice either to burn the church or slay the priest
whom the bishop had set there. Then Arn-grim answered, 'I will not
let any of my friends do the priest any harm, for my brother has
cruelly avenged smaller wrongs; but I reckon it a good plan to burn
the church; nevertheless I will not meddle with it myself.' A little
after this Clauve came over by night, and nine men in his company,
to try and burn the church; but when they came to the churchyard they
beheld as it were fire blowing out of the church at every window,
and they went off, for they beheld the whole church as it were full
of fire. But when they heard that the church was not burnt, they
came over a second night and Arn-grim with them, meaning to burn the
church. And when they had broken into the church, he kindled a fire
there with dry mountain beech, but the fire was slow to kindle. Then
he lay down, and blew into the church over the threshold. Then there
came an arrow in the floor close past his head, and another between
his shirt and his sides. Then he sprang up, saying that he would not
wait for the third, and with that he went home. Now this church was
built sixteen winters before Christendom was made law in Iceland,
and it was standing when bishop Botolf was at Holar [1238-1246],
although it had only been repaired with a thatching of turves.

4. Bishop Frederick and Thor-wald journeyed to the Moot, and the bishop
asked Thor-wald to preach the faith before men at the Hill of Laws,
he standing by while Thor-wald spoke. And a certain gentleman answered
him with many and ill words, Hedin of Swal-bard in Ey-frith. This
Hedin was the son of Thor-biorn, Scage's son, the son of Shafto. He
had to wife Ragn-heid, the step-daughter and brother's daughter of
Ey-wolf, Walgerd's son. They asked poets to lampoon Thor-wald and
the bishop. And this was what was composed:--


    The bishop has borne nine bairns ava',
    Thor-wald's the father of them a'.



For this lampoon Thor-wald slew two men which had made the lampoon.

5. And when Thor-wald had slain the poets, he went to the bishop to
tell him what he had done. The bishop was sitting indoors looking
at his book, and before Thor-wald walked in, there came two drops
of blood on the book before the bishop. The bishop knew at once
that this was some omen. And when Thor-wald came to him he said,
'Either thou hast committed manslaughter or hast it in thy mind
to do so.' Thor-wald told him what he had done. The bishop said,
'Why didst thou do so?' Thor-wald answered, 'I could not bear them
to call us raga.' Said the bishop, 'That was but a little trial to
bear, though they tell this lie, that thou hast children; but thou
hast taken their words in the worst way, for I might well bear thy
children if thou had any: a Christian man should not seek to avenge
himself, though he were hatefully reviled, but rather endure contumely
and insult for God's sake.'

6. And when Thor-wald and the bishop wished to ride to Heron's-ness
Moot, then certain of the heathen went to meet them, and fought
against them with stones, so that they could not go on their way
[to the Moot]. And after this they were outlawed according to the
heathen laws. Then the bishop spake: 'Now is fulfilled what my mother
dreamed long ago, that she thought she had found wolf's hair on my
head, for now we are hunted and chased like devouring wolves.'

And the same summer after the All-thing, the chiefs gathered a
company and rode forth with 200 men, meaning to burn the bishop in the
house. They baited their horses before they rode up to the homestead
at Leck-moot, but when they were about to mount a flock of birds got
up close to them, and with that their steeds got frightened, and they
fell off their backs. Some broke their legs and some their arms, or
were hurt by their own weapons, and some men's horses ran away, and so
they went back home again. The bishop and his friends were not aware
of this rising upon them before it was over. At that time they had
been three winters at Leck-moot, and they abode there one winter later.

7. After this they went abroad. And when they came to Norway they put
into a certain haven, and it came to pass that while they were there
Hedin came from Iceland and put into the same haven, and straightway
landed and went up to the shaw to hew wood. And when Thor-wald knew
of it, he went up with his thrall and had him slain there. But when
the bishop came to know of it he said that they must break up their
partnership because he was so revengeful. And the bishop journeyed
southward into Saxony, and there he died, and he is a man of true
saintliness. But Thor-wald was then first engaged in merchant voyages
for a while.



3. 1. In the days of king Harold Gormsson, Albertus bishop of Bremen
came to Ar-oyce in Jutland, and set himself in the bishop's see
there. The name of his clerk was Thang-brand, the son of Willi-bald the
gerefa of Bremen. And when Thang-brand was grown up, Hugbert, bishop
of Canterbury, asked his brother Albertus to come and see him. At
the banquet Hugbert gave gifts to Albertus and all his company. And
the bishop said to Thang-brand, 'Thou art in manners as a knight,
wherefore I give thee a shield, and there is a cross with the image
of our Lord marked on it, that marks thy clerkship.'

2. A little while after this Thang-brand met An-laf Tryggvason in
Wend-land. An-laf asked him, 'Whom do ye Christian men worship
suffering on the cross?' Thang-brand answered, 'Our Lord Jesus
Christ.' The king asks, 'Why suffered he, and what evil had he
done?' Then Thang-brand told king An-laf carefully at length of
the passion of our Lord and the tokens of the cross. Then the king
wished to get the shield, and Thang-brand gave him the shield, and
the king gave him the worth of the shield in burnt silver, and said,
'If thou need any help or maintenance, then come to me, and I will
repay thee for the shield.'

3. Somewhat later king An-laf had himself baptized in the Scillies
off Ireland.

Thang-brand bought a fair Irish maid with his silver, and when he came
home with her a certain man whom the emperor Otto the Young [Otho II]
had given as hostage or put as steward there, wished to take her
from him, but he would not let her go. The hostage or steward was
a great champion, and he challenged Thang-brand to wager of battle,
but Thang-brand got the victory and slew him; wherefore Thang-brand
could not abide in Denmark, so he went to king An-laf Tryggvason,
and he received him well, and he was consecrated priest there, and
was the king's court-priest [chaplain] for a little while.

4. King An-laf journeyed from Ireland eastward into Holm-garth
[Russia], and out of Holm-garth to Norway, as it is written in the
History of him, and he preached Christendom to the whole people. He
had a church first built in a certain island called Moster, and set
Thang-brand there to sing service in the island, and gave him house
and lands. He was a great spendthrift and prodigal, and his money
soon gave out. Then he gat him a ship of war, and harried the heathen,
and plundered far and wide, and kept up his company thereby.

5. King An-laf came into Norway at the beginning of Goe
[February]. There were many Icelanders with him. One of them was
named Stephen. He was the son of Thor-gils son of Eilif, son of Helge
Beolan of Keel-ness. King An-laf sent Stephen to Iceland the first
summer he came to Norway to carry God's message there. But when
he came to Iceland he was ill received, and worst by his kinsmen,
for all the people here in this land were then heathen. Howbeit he
journeyed boldly north and south, making known the right faith, but
men paid little heed to his teaching. And when he saw that it got no
furtherance, he betook himself to defacing temples and high places
and breaking the idols. Then the heathen gathered together a company,
and hardly was he able to betake himself to Keel-ness, and there
he lived with his kinsmen. His ship lay in at Gowe-water-oyce. She
was carried out to sea in the winter by the river floods and strong
gales. Whereon the heathen made this verse:--



    Now hath the mountain-wind wrecked Stephen's ship:
    The mighty Anse hath caused it, I ween.
    The Gods must be wroth ...


                [See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 80 (corrected here).]


The ship was driven ashore somewhat broken, and Stephen had her
repaired in the spring.

6. That summer it was made law at the All-moot that Christian men's
kinsmen should take action against them as blasphemers, that is
those kinsmen that were nearer than fifth cousins and farther than
second cousins. And the same summer Stephen was sued for being a
Christian. His kinsmen set the suit afoot because Christendom was
then called a kin-shame or family disgrace. Thor-wolf and Ans-kell,
Wand-rad and Tor-rad, the sons of Oswif the Sage, brought the suit
against him, but Ospac would take no part in it. And Stephen said,
'There shall no harm come to me of my outlawry, but because of it
great misfortune will overtake you within a few winters.' Stephen
went abroad in the summer, and king An-laf received him well.

7. When king An-laf heard of the breach of the peace that Thang-brand
was committing, he summoned him to him, and told him that he could
not be in his service since he was a robber. Then Thang-brand asked
the king to send him on some hard errand. And the king said, 'We will
be reconciled if thou go to Iceland and make the land Christian.' And
Thang-brand said, 'I will venture upon it.'


4. 1. The same summer Thang-brand journeyed to Iceland he made
Seal-voes in North Alfet-frith, north of Fox-ess. But when it was
known that Thang-brand and his men were Christians, the country folk
would not speak to them nor show them to the haven or pilot them.

2. At that time Hall o' Side was living at A [River]. He was on a
journey to Fleet-dale, but when he came home, Thang-brand went to meet
him, and told him that king An-laf had sent him to Hall, if he made
land in the East-friths: and he asked him to show them to a haven, and
give them such other help as they needed. Hall had the vessel brought
over to the southern Alfet-frith to Lear-voe, and they berthed up
their ship at a place that is now called Thang-brand's-dock; but the
crew Hall took home to his house-field, and they set up a tent there
in which Thang-brand and his men dwelt. Thang-brand used to sing his
mass there. The day before Michael's-mass Thang-brand made a holiday
at the ninth hour. And Hall was in the tent at the time. He asked,
'Why dost thou stop work now?' Says Thang-brand, 'To-morrow is the
feast of Michael the Archangel.' Hall asked, 'What manner of being is
he?' Thang-brand answers, 'He is appointed to receive the souls of
Christian men;' and he went on to talk a great deal about the glory
of God's angels. Said Hall, 'Mighty man is he whom these angels
serve!' Said Thang-brand, 'God gives thee this knowledge!' In the
evening Hall said to his household, 'Thang-brand and his men hold the
day to-morrow holy to their God, and I will have you profit thereby,
wherefore ye shall do no work to-morrow, and we will now go and see the
rites of the Christian men.' On the morrow Thang-brand kept the hours
[sang the services] in his tent, and Hall and his household went to see
their rites, and they listened to the sound of the bells, and smelt
the savour of the incense, and beheld the vestments, fine linen and
purple. Hall asked his household what they thought of the rites of the
Christians, and they said that they liked it well. And on the Saturday
before Easter, Hall and all his household were baptized there in the
River. The river was called Thwatt-a [Dip-water] ever afterwards.

[Double text.] Hall was baptized the Saturday before Easter in his
brook or beck, and all his household. Priest Thang-brand gave the
brook a name, and called it Thwatt-water, and the homestead has ever
since been called after it.

3. That summer Thang-brand rode with Hall to the All-moot, and when
they reached Shaw-wharf behold the heathen hired a certain man who
was called Charm-Hedin, to make the earth give under Thang-brand. And
that very day as they were riding out of Kirkby from Swart As-beorn's
son, the son of Thorstan-Ketil the Fool's son,--men that were
all baptized generations back or these forbears dwelt at Kirkby
one after another, and were all Christians, because no heathen man
might dwell there,--Thang-brand's steed fell into the earth, but he
sprang off its back and stood safe upon the bank. On this journey
of theirs Thang-brand baptized many men--Gizor the White and Hall
o' Hawk-dale, who was then three years old, and Sholto, Scegge's
son. Thang-brand did God's errand at the Moot bravely, and many men
out of the South-land-men's Quarter and the North-land-men's Quarter
received the faith. He went away after the Moot, meaning to go by
the eastern road to Ey-frith. He came north into Axe-frith during
the summer, and baptized many men in the brook hard by Skin-stead
that is called Brand's-beck ever since, and at Thang-brand's pool
in Midge-water, but he was not able to get further on his journey
than Shelving-fleet, because of the force of the Ey-frith-men; so he
turned back into East-frith and taught the faith there. Thang-brand
went west by the southern road.

4. Now when Thang-brand began to teach the faith in Iceland many men
set themselves to make lampoons on him. Thor-wald Weile, who dwelt
at Wick in Grim's-ness, did so. He made verses upon Thang-brand,
and this verse he told to Wolf the poet:--


    To Wolf the dauntless Ugge's son I will send a message
    To bid him drive away the foul blasphemer of the gods.


                [See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 80 (corrected here).]

And Wolf answered him:--


    I will not take the bait in my mouth though Thorwald send it.
    It is not mine to bolt the fly, much evil will come of it.


                [See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 80 (corrected here).]

Winter-lide the poet also made a lampoon upon Thang-brand, and many
others beside did so. But when Thang-brand and his friends were come
west into Fleet's-lithe--now God-laf Arason of Reek-hills was with
him--they found that Winter-lide the poet was out cutting turf with
his house-carles. And Thang-brand and his men went after him and slew
him. And this verse was made upon God-laf:--


    The Rood-bearer [Thangbrand] slew the Poet with a sword.
    The Soma-keeper [Godlaf] smote Winter-lide the poet.


Thence they journeyed westward into Grim's-ness, and came upon
Thor-wald by Hengist-beck, and slew him there. Then they turned back
and stayed with Hall a second winter, and in the spring Thang-brand
made ready his ship.



5. 1. That summer Thang-brand was sued to outlawry for these
manslaughters.

He put to sea, but was driven back into Borg-frith up the Hot-river, at
the place that is now called Thang-brand's-dock, down from Ship-deep,
and there still stands on a rock his mooring-stone. But when they
were come there, the men of the hundred held a meeting to forbid all
dealing with them. Thang-brand came to Cross-holt and sung mass there,
and set up a cross.

2. There was a man named Col, that dwelt at Beck-bent. He had so
much meat that he hardly knew what he should do with it. Thang-brand
went to his house and wanted to buy meat of him, but he would not
sell any. Then they took some of the meat, and left the worth of it
there. Col went down to Hot-river-ness and complained to Scegg-Beorn,
who dwelt there. He went with Col to see Thang-brand, and they
asked him to give back what he had robbed and pay boot for it,
but Thang-brand denied this flatly. They fought on the water-meadow
down by Stan's-holt, and Scegg-Beorn fell there and eight men with
him. Scegg-Beorn's barrow stands there on the water-mead, but the
others were buried at Land-drow's-holt hard by the water-meadow, and
there is still to be clearly seen the cairns. Two of Thang-brand's
men fell.

But when Gizor the White knew of these tidings he asked Thang-brand
to his house, and he stayed there with him the third winter.

3. That winter Thang-brand's ship was driven out of Hot-river and
badly wrecked, and driven ashore north of Calf-beck.

4. Stan-wor, the mother of poet Ref, came to meet him. She preached
heathendom to Thang-brand and spoke at length to him. Thang-brand
was silent while she spake, but afterwards he talked long, and
confounded all that she had said. 'Hast thou heard this,' said she,
'that Thor challenged Christ to a wager of battle, and he dared not
to fight against Thor?' 'I have heard,' saith Thang-brand, 'that Thor
was nothing more than dust and ashes if God had not wished him to
live.' 'Knowest thou,' saith she, 'who hath wrecked thy ship?' 'What
sayest thou thereon?' saith he. 'I will tell thee,' saith she--


    Thor drove Thangbrand's ship from her moorings,
    The Powers broke the sea-bird of the bell-ward,
    Christ did not guard the vessel,
    God did not watch over the boat.


            [See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 80 (corrected here).]

5. In the spring Thang-brand journeyed west into Bard-strand to see
Guest the Sage, and there a Norwegian bear-sark challenged him to wager
of battle, and Thang-brand consented thereto. The bear-sark said,
'Thou wilt not dare to fight with me, if thou see my feats; I can
go barefoot over a burning fire, and I can let myself fall naked on
my knife-edge, and neither does me any harm.' Thang-brand answered,
'Nevertheless God shall rule in this.' Thang-brand hallowed the fire,
and made the sign of the cross over the knife. The bear-sark burnt
his feet when he walked through the fire, and when he fell upon his
knife it went through him, and he got his death thereby. At which
thing many good men rejoiced, albeit they were heathen. Then Guest
and certain of his friends had themselves prime-signed.

6. Thang-brand went eastward and had his ship repaired. He called
her Iron-basket. He sailed south along the frith to Haven, and
put into the bay, and lay there ready for sea, and that place
was called Iron-basket's-head ever after. It lieth between Haven
and Belly-holt. He went abroad that summer to meet king An-laf at
Thrond-ham.


6. 1. In the summer at the Moot there was great talk about the faith
which Thang-brand preached, for some men blasphemed it much, but
they that were baptized mocked the gods, and so there arose great
parties or factions. It was then that Sholto, Scegge's son, recited
this lampoon at the Rock of Laws. [See Libellus 7. 3.]

And for this lampoon Run-wolf the priest or gode, the son of Wolf, the
son of Eor-wend the gode, took action and sued Sholto for blasphemy,
and showed therein more of his might and obstinacy than right. Albeit
he could not get the court sat--so beloved was Sholto--before he
set it at Axe-water-bridge, and had both bridge-tails kept with
arms. There was no one who would sum up the case till Thor-beorn,
the son of Thor-kell o' God-dales, took his seat in the court and
summed up the case, and by his doom was Sholto condemned to outlawry
for his blasphemy.

2. That summer he went abroad in the ship that he had built at home
in Thiors-water-dale, and he brought her down along West Rang-water
to the sea. And as he and his men were journeying down below along
the river, a man came running along the land above with a spear and
shield in his hands. Sholto called to him,


    'There lies a wisp of straw where thine heart should be.'


He cast the spear at Sholto, but Sholto caught up his shield and the
spear lit upon it. Sholto's men sprang ashore and took the man, and
asked him who he was. He said his name was Narve, and that Run-wolf had
sent him to get the head of Sholto, and thereby he should free himself
from his outlawry. But Sholto said, 'I know a better thing for thee;
do thou come aboard with me, and I will make thee a free man.' Sholto
went aboard and made land about harvest north in Throndham, for he
wished to meet king An-laf. And at the same time Gizor the White,
his father-in-law, came abroad from Iceland.

3. King An-laf had christened Haloga-land, and he reached Niths oyce
about harvest-tide. Now there were there at that time many Icelanders
captains of ships. Ceartan son of Olaf Peacock, and Calf As-gar's
son, and Bolle Thor-lac's son commanded one ship. Hall-dor the son
of God-mund the Mighty was also there in command of his own ship,
and Col-ban son of Thord the priest or gode of Frey, and Swert-ing
the son of Run-wolf the priest or gode, Hall-fred Ot-here's son,
and Thor-arin Neb-wolf's son. All these were heathen men. They lay
off the town, meaning to sail to the south of the country, but they
did not get a wind till the king was come from the north.

4. It happened one fine day that there came men from the town to
swim in the sea, and they that were on board the ships perceived
that one of the men was a far better swimmer than the rest. Said
Bolle Thor-lac's son to Ceartan his kinsman, 'Why dost thou not try a
swim with that clever man?' Said Ceartan, 'I do not want to vie with
him.' 'Where is thy courage gone?' says Bolle, and began to cast
off his clothes. Then Ceartan sprang up and cast off his clothes,
and bade Bolle be still. Ceartan then leapt into the sea to swim,
and struck out towards the man and pulled him down, and held him
under for a time. After that they came up, and Ceartan pulled him
down a second time; but when Ceartan wanted to come up, he caught
hold of him and kept him down for a while. And the third time he
pulled Ceartan down, and kept him down so long that he was well-nigh
drowned. Then they swam ashore, and the man asked Ceartan if he knew
with whom he had vied in swimming. He said he did not know. Then he
gave Ceartan a scarlet cloak, and told him that now he must know with
whom he had vied in swimming, and Ceartan knew then that this man was
king An-laf. He thanked him courteously for his gift. The heathens
were not at all pleased that Ceartan had taken a gift from the king.

On Michaelmas-day men (Icelanders) went to hear the services and
see the ways of the Christians, and when they came aboard again they
talked over among themselves what they thought of their rites. Ceartan
spoke well of them, but only few of the others. The king soon heard
of this, and sent for Ceartan and asked him if he would become a
Christian. Ceartan said that it was in the king's power to bring him
to consent. Then the king asked him what he meant by that. 'That thou
should not give me less honour here than I may look for in Iceland if
I do not go back there.' And the king agreed to this. Then Ceartan
was baptized, and he stayed with the king as his guest while he was
in his chrisom-clothes.

[B* (O). Double text.] Now first it must be told of the Icelanders
that the same summer there came men out of Iceland to Nith's oyce, a
little before king An-laf came from the north out of Haloga-land. There
was one man named Hall-dor son of God-mund the Mighty of Madder-field,
another Col-ban the son of Thord Frey's priest or gode, the brother of
Flose o' the Burning, a third Swerting, the son of Run-wolf the priest
or gode; and the master of the ship was Thor-arin Neb-wolf's son. These
were all heathens, and many others both rich and poor. Those men that
were named above, each with his crew, sought to sail away as soon as
king An-laf was come from the north out of Haloga-land, because it
was told them that the king compelled all men to Christendom. The
heathens stood out of the river as soon as the king came to the
town. They were sailing out along the frith, when there met them a
contrary wind, and drove them back again up the frith to Nith-holm. It
was told king An-laf that there were Icelanders lying out under Holm
in certain ships, and they were all heathen, and wished to fly from
his presence. The king straightway sent men out to them and forbade
them to leave the country, and bade them put back to the town. They
did so, but did not unload their ships. At that time there came out
of Iceland men of note and great worth or worship that had taken
Christendom at the hands of Thang-brand the priest, Gizor the White,
and Sholto, Scegge's son, of Steer's-water-dale.



7. 1. At that very time Thang-brand the priest came to the king from
Iceland, and told him what enmity men had shown him there, and said
that there was no hope of Christendom being received there. Then the
king was so angry that he had many of the Icelanders taken prisoners
and set in irons. Some he ordered to be slain, and some maimed,
and some were plundered, for he said that he would pay them for the
unworthy way their fathers had received his message in Iceland. But
Sholto and Gizor spoke for them, saying that the king had promised that
no man should have done such ill but that he would give them his peace
if they would be baptized. Gizor reckoned up his kinship to the king:
Alof, his mother, was the daughter of Bead-were the Herse or Lord,
son of Wicking-Care, and Ast-rid, king An-laf's mother, was the
daughter of Eirik Bead-were's brother. Moreover Gizor said that he
thought there was hope that Christendom would succeed in Iceland if
it were wisely forwarded. 'But Thang-brand hath carried himself there
as he did here, rather lawlessly in slaying certain men there, and
men thought it hard to brook such behaviour in a stranger.' And king
An-laf said, 'All these men shall have quarter if Sholto and thyself
will bind yourselves that Christendom shall succeed in Iceland; but
I will take as hostages those among them whom I think to be of the
best families of the Icelandmen, until it be tried how the business
goes.' And to this end the king named Ceartan Olaf's son, Hall-dor,
the son of God-mund the Mighty, Col-ban, the son of Thord the priest
or gode of Frey, the brother of Flose o' the Burning, and Swerting,
the son of Run-wolf the priest or gode. Then a man said when Swerting
was spoken of, 'Swerting is not worthy of Sholto being bound for him,
for his father sued Sholto sackless or for no guilt.' But Thang-brand
answered and said, 'It will often be proven that Sholto takes a better
part than those who are against him; and do thou, lord, treat Sholto
and Gizor well, for they often repay evil with good.' Sholto and
Gizor agreed to do the king's errand to Iceland, and then all the
Icelanders that were there were set free and baptized.

2. King An-laf stood god-father to Hall-fred, for he would not let
himself be baptized unless he did; and therefore the king called him
the Hard-poet, and gave him a sword to bind the name.

Gizor and Sholto stayed that winter with the king, and Gizor sat as the
king's drink-mate nearer the king above his thanes. And the Icelanders
that were hostages were with the king also, and were well entreated.



8. 1. In the spring Sholto and Gizor fitted out their ship to go to
Iceland. Many would have dissuaded Sholto from going, but he paid no
heed to what they said.

That summer king An-laf went out of the country to Wend-land in the
south, and he sent Leif Eiric's son to Green-land to preach the faith
there. It was then that Leif discovered Wine-land the Good. He also
discovered a crew on the wreck of a ship out in the deep sea, and so
he got the name of Leif the Lucky.

2. Sholto and Gizor made land off Door-holm-oyce the day that Flose
o' the Burning was riding over Arn-stack-heath to the All-moot. And
he heard from them that had rowed off to them that Col-ban his
brother had been taken and kept as a hostage, and all about the
errand Sholto and Gizor were doing, and he told these tidings at
the All-moot. Sholto and Gizor made the West-man-eys the same day,
and berthed their ship off Harrow-eyre. There they carried their
butts ashore and the church timber that king An-laf had had hewn;
he had told them withal that they should raise a church where they
first shot their landing-stages ashore. Before the church was raised
they cast lots to find on which side of the bay it should stand,
and the lot fell for the north side, where there were sacrifices and
harrows before. But when Gizor and his men had abode in the island
two days, and had already set up the frame-timbers, then they went
thence and made Ey-sand. It was the very day when men were riding to
the Moot. They could get no furtherance or horses east of Wrang-water,
because the moot-men of Run-wolf held every house. They walked till
they came to Have to Scegge Ansgaut's son [Iodur's son]. He gave them
horses for the Moot; but Thor-wald his son had already ridden from
home. He had to wife Col-torf, Sholto's sister. And when they came
to Bath-dale they persuaded Sholto that he should stay behind with
eleven other men, because he was under the lesser outlawry.

3. Gizor and his men rode on until they came to Welling-kettle by
Aulfus-mere. Then they sent word to the All-moot that their friends
and kinsfolk by marriage should ride to meet them. They had heard then
that their foes meant to keep them off the moot-field. But before
they rode from Welling-kettle Sholto and his men came up. And their
kinsmen and friends came to meet them, and then they rode to the
Moot with a great company to the booth of As-grim Ellida-Grim's son,
the sister's son of Gizor. Then the heathen men ran together under all
arms, and it was mighty nigh coming to a battle between them, but that
there were some that wished to hinder the peace being broken, albeit
they were not Christians. There was a priest whose name was Thor-mod,
whom king An-laf had given to Sholto and Gizor. He sung mass the day
after at Geow-bank, up over the West-frith-men's booth. Thence they
walked to the Rock of Laws. There were seven men in vestments. They
had two crosses [carried before them] that are now in East Scard
[Outer Scard]; one marks the height of king An-laf, and the other
the height of Sholto Scegge's son.

4. At the Rock of Laws the whole assembly of the Moot was. Sholto
and his company had incense burning, and the savour was smelt as well
against the wind as before it. Then Sholto and Gizor set forth their
errand well and bravely, and men wondered how quick and how well they
spoke, and such great awe followed their words that their enemies dared
not speak in answer to them. And then began this, that one man after
another named him witnesses, and each man declared the other outlaw,
the Christian men and the heathen men [against one another].

5. Then came a man running and saying that earth-fire was come
up in Aulfus, and that it would overrun the homestead of Thor-ord
the gode. Then the heathen men began to say, 'It is no wonder that
the gods are wroth at such speeches.' Then Snorre the gode spoke:
'What were the gods wroth over them, when the lava on which we are
now standing was burning here?'

After that men left the Rock of the Laws.

6. Then the Christian men prayed Hall o' Side to speak the law for
them which should follow Christendom. Hall fee'd Thor-gar the gode,
who was then Law-speaker, with half a hundred of silver [60] to speak
the Law for both the Christian and the heathen, and at this time he
[Thor-gar] was not yet baptized, [on this condition that he should
keep three clauses in the framing of the laws according to what Sholto,
Gizor, and Hall laid down, no matter how he framed the other laws. The
first clause was that all men in Iceland should be Christian, and
they take baptism that were unbaptized before. The second was that
all temples and false gods should be unholy, i. e. unlawful. The third
was that the lesser outlawry should be the penalty of all witchcraft
or sacrifice if there were any witness thereof.]

And when men came to the booths Thor-gar laid him down and spread
a rug over his head, and lay all the day and all the night and the
next day till the same hour.

7. The heathen men had then summoned a great gathering, and there
they agreed to sacrifice two men out of each Quarter, and call upon
the heathen gods withal that they would not let Christendom spread
over the country.

But Sholto and Gizor had another gathering of Christian men, and
agreed that they too would have human sacrifices as many as the
heathen. They spake thus: 'The heathen sacrifice the worst men,
and cast them over rocks or cliffs, but we will choose the best of
men, and call it a gift of victory to our Lord Jesus Christ, and we
will bind ourselves to live better and more sinlessly than before,
and Gizor and I will offer ourselves as the gift of victory for our
Quarter.' And for the East-frith-men's Quarter there came forth Hall o'
Side and Thor-laf o' Cross-wick, north of Reyd-frith, a step-son of
Asbeorn Shag-head, and brother of Thor-arin of Seyd-frith. Ingi-laf
was the mother of both. Fat-Cetil had summoned Thor-laf at the counsel
of Brord-Helge, and the weather grew so bad that Cetil was glad to
come to Thor-laf for the night, and there he got a good welcome, and
thereby the suit fell. But out of the North-land-men's Quarter there
came forth as the gift of victory, Hlenne the Old and Thor-ward the
son of Spac-Beadwere. And out of the West-frith-men's Quarter Guest
Ordlaf's son. There was no other with him, and Sholto and Gizor
were ill pleased with this. Then up spoke Orm Codran's son. He was
a guest at Gils-bank at that time, for Her-mund Illuge's son had to
wife Gund-hild, his daughter. 'There would be a man for this place if
my brother Thor-wald the Far-farer were here in the country, but I am
willing now to stand if ye will receive me.' They consented thereto,
and he was baptized at once.

8. And on the next day Thor-gar sat up and sent word round the booths
that men should go to the Rock of the Laws. And when men came to the
Rock of the Laws he said that he thought it was come to a sorry pass
in the land if men did not keep one law here in the land, and begged
that men would not do so, saying that therefrom would come battles
and war, and that it would sweep away everything to the point of
laying waste of the land. He also told them this [story], that there
were two kings, the one named Day, who was in Denmark, the other named
Tryggwe, who was in Norway. They had long kept up strife between them,
till at last the people of both countries took the matter into their
own hands and made peace between them, although they themselves did
not wish it; but this plan was so successful that they [the kings],
after a few winters' space, were sending gifts to each other, and
their friendship endured as long as they both did live. 'And this
seems to me the best, not to let them have their will that are most
out and out on each side, but let us so umpire the matter between
them that each side may gain somewhat of his case, but let us all
have one law and one faith. For this saying shall be proved true,
If the Constitution be broken the peace will be broken.'

Thor-gar ended his speech in such a way that each side agreed to hold
those laws which he should think best to declare.

9. This was the declaration of Thor-gar, that all men in Iceland
should be baptized and believe in one God, but as to the exposure of
children, and the eating of horse-flesh, the old law should hold;
men might sacrifice in secret if they would, but should fall under
the lesser outlawry if witnesses came forward against them. This
heathendom was taken away some years later.

B* (N). Then he put forth the rules as to the keeping of the Lord's-day
and the fast-days, the days of Yule, and the days of Pasch or Easter,
and the greatest holidays.

10. All the North-land-men's Quarter were baptized in Reek-bath in
Bath-dale as they rode from the Moot, for they would not go into cold
water. Sholto spake this verse when Run-wolf was baptized,


    'We are teaching the old priest now how to mumble the salt.'


That summer the whole assembly of the Moot was baptized as men were
riding home. Most of the Western-men were baptized in Reek-bath
in South Reek-dale. Snorre gode had the greatest weight among the
West-frith-men.

11. The summer when Christendom was taken into the laws of Iceland
there were gone from the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ one
thousand winters.

12. That summer king An-laf vanished off the Long Serpent south off
Swold, iiii id. Septembris. He had then been king of Norway five
winters. After him Earl Eiric Hacon's son took the rule.



9. 1. Thor-wald Codran's son and Stephen Thor-gil's son met after
the vanishing of king An-laf. They travelled both together far and
wide over the world, and all the way out to Jerusalem, and thence to
Mickle-garth [Byzantium], and so to Coenu-garth [Kovno or in Lettic
Kaune] the Eastern along the Dnieper. Thor-wald died in Russia a
short way from Palteskia [Polotsk]. There he is buried in a certain
rock or hill at the church of John the Baptist, and they call him a
saint. So saith Brand the Far-farer:--


    I have been where to Thorwald
    Codran's son Christ giveth rest:
     He is buried in a high mount
    Up on the Dnieper at John's Church.


        [See Corpus Poet. Bor. i. 363.]

2. Stephen then went north to Denmark, and when he came to Denmark
he quoth this verse:--


    I will not name him, but I will mark him nearly--
    Down-bent is the niddering's nose:
    He who got king Swain abroad by treason,
    And drew Tryggvason into his toils.


        [See Corpus Poet. Bor. i. 368.]

In this verse earl Sig-wald thought he could see his own marks,
and for this reason he let slay Stephen.

This is the relation of Are the Old [Elder]:--



10. 1. Gizor the White dwelt at Head ere he built the homestead at
Scal-holt and flitted his household over there. He set all his mind
to the strengthening of Christendom. He sent his son Is-laf south
into Sax-land, and he went to school in a town then called Her-forth
[Her-fort], and when he came to Iceland he took to wife Dalla
Thor-wald's daughter, and their sons were Gizor, and Tait All-crafts
in Hawk-dale, and Thor-wald.

2. Here were first foreign bishops, who taught teachings. [Lib. 8. 1.]

See Libellus 9. 1. 8 ........ There over his grave stood Are the
historian, being twelve winters old, he who has told most of the
things that are here written.

3. See Libellus 10. 1, 2 .... He has been the wisest of the
law-speakers of Iceland next to Skafte.... [Mark.]

4-7. See Libellus 10. 3-9, 11.

8. Bishop Gizor kept such peace in the land that there were no great
feuds between the chiefs, and the carrying of arms was almost laid
aside. Most of the men of worship were clerks and hallowed priests,
albeit they were chiefs. Such were (in the South), Hall Tait's son in
Hawk-dale, and Sæ-mund the historian, Magnus Thord's son in Reek-holt,
Simon Ior-und's son in By; and in the West God-mund the son of Brand
in Herd-holt, Are the historian, Ingi-mund Einar's son o' Holar; in
the North, Cetil Thor-stan's son o' Madderfield, and Cetil God-mund's
son; and in the East, priest John Thor-ward's son, and many others,
though they be not written here.

9. See Libellus 10. 10-12 .....

Iceland had then been settled two hundred winters twelve told [240],
one hundred in heathendom, one hundred in Christendom.

There had then passed from the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ
eleven hundred and eighteen years.

10. When bishop Gizor died, these were the greatest chiefs in Iceland:
in the North, Haf-lide Mar's son, and the sons of As-beorn Arnor's son
in Shaw-frith, Thor-gar Hall's son, and priest Cetil Thor-stan's son;
and in the East, Gizor Einar's son, Sig-mund Thor-gil's son: he died
that year on pilgrimage to Rome; and in the South, Hall Tait's son,
Scule Egil's son; and in the West, Styrme Rein's son, Hall-dor Egil's
son, Thor-gils Orde's son, Thord Egil's son, Thord Thor-wald's son
in Water-frith.












APPENDIX TO § 1 (BK. III).

THE TALE OF THORWALD THE FAR-FARER.


This story is part and parcel of the Gunlaug section of Christne Saga;
both taken together make up the complete story such as it has been
handed down. In the Christne Saga text we used up the smaller and
handier bits: the lengthy ones that could not find place there we
give here. It has gone through the crucible of being edited in Latin
and amplified, by Gunlaug one thinks, for he is quoted. The Latin is
lost, but a Norse version, late 13th or early 14th century, has been
inserted in the big Olaf Tryggvason's Saga, as found in Flatey-book,
AM. 61, and Berg-book. Hence it reads better in translation than in
original Icelandic.

The text has been over and over again issued, in the Scalh. 1689;
Copen. 1778; Fornm. Sogor, vol. i. 1825, from AM. 61; in Flatey-book,
vol. i. 1860; and in Biskopa Sogor, vol. i. p. 33 ff. As we have no
fresh emendations to make, and would save space, we give no text,
but refer the curious reader to one of the editions named above.



1. There was a man named Eilif Erne, after whom the highest mountain in
Reek-strand in Shaw-frith is named [Pedigrees as Ld. III. 6. 6]. The
third son of Eilif was named Codran. He dwelt at Gill-water in
Water-dale. He was a wealthy man. His wife was named Iarn-gerd. One
of their sons was called Orm, and the other Thor-wald. Codran loved
his son Orm much, but he loved Thor-wald little or not at all. He
was kept to work as soon as he could do anything; he was poorly clad,
and treated in everything as if he were but a bastard compared with
his brother. He served his father in the house according as he was
bidden with all good-will.

At that time Thor-dis the Wise-woman dwelt out at Shaw-strand, at the
place that was afterwards called the Spae-quean's-fell. One summer
she was the guest of Codran at Gill-water, for he was a friend of
hers. But as Thor-dis was at the feast, and saw what difference there
was made between the brothers, she said to Codran, 'I will give thee
this advice, to show more kindliness henceforward to Thor-wald thy
son than thou hast hitherto done; for I can see by true signs that he
will become a more noble man than all the rest of thy kinsfolk; and if
thou hast now but little love for him, then do thou give him money to
trade with and let him go, if there be any one who will look after him
while he is young.' Codran saw that she spake thus out of good-will,
and said that he would certainly give him some money, so he pulled out
a bag and showed it to her. Thor-dis looked at the silver and said,
'He shall not have this money, for this money thou hast gotten by
might and oppression of men in fines.' He brought out another bag
and bade her look at it. She did so, and then said, 'I will not take
this money on his behalf.' Codran asked, 'What fault dost thou find
with this money?' Thor-dis answered, 'These pence thou hast drawn
together out of thy greed to thy tenants, and out of profit on stock
[usury] greater than is right, wherefore such moneys are not meet for
the use of him who shall be both upright and bountiful.' Then Codran
showed a fat money bag, and it was full of silver. Thor-dis took out
of it three marks of silver on Thor-wald's behalf, and gave Codran
back what was over. Then Codran said, 'Why art thou rather willing to
take of these pence on my son's behalf than of those which I showed
thee before?' She answered, 'Because thou hast come by them fairly,
for thou hast taken them in the heritage of thy father.' After this
Thor-dis went away from the feast with seemly gifts and the friendship
of Codran. She took Thor-wald home with her to Spae-quean's-fell,
and he was with her for a little while, well kept as to clothes and
other things that he needed, and he began to thrive mightily.

2. But when he was fairly full grown he went abroad by the counsel of
Thor-dis. He did not stop till he came to Denmark. There he met Swain,
who was called Fork-beard. Swain was of mean race by his mother's side,
but he said that he was the son of Harold the son of Gorm the king
of the Danes. Swain was not in the country in Denmark at that time,
because king Harold could not acknowledge his fatherhood to him. He
was out long a-warring, and was called King by the liths-men [crews],
as was the custom of wickings. But when Thor-wald came to see Swain
he received him well, and Thor-wald became his man, and was with him
some summers a-warring West of the Sea [i.e. in the British Isles],
Thor-wald had not been long with king Swain ere that the king began
to prize him above other men, and above all his own friends, because
Thor-wald was a man of good counsel, whom all could see to be a
man of worth and wisdom, strong of body and stout-hearted, keen in
fight and brisk in battle, bountiful and open-hearted with his money,
and proved of the fullest faithfulness and humble service, heartily
liked and dearly loved by all the liths-men, and not undeservedly,
for though he was still a heathen he showed justice above the custom
of other heathen men, so that all the booty he took in warring he
bestowed upon the needy and in ransoming prisoners, and he helped
many who were hard put to it. Now inasmuch as he was more valorous
than the other liths-men, it was made a law that he should have some
choice thing out of every capture. But he made use of this privilege
they gave him by choosing out the son of some mighty man, or such
other object as they who lost it would miss most, and as his fellows
thought least about giving up to him, and these he would send back to
them that had lost them. Wherefore they also loved him as much that
had been plundered by Swain's men, and they spread abroad the praise
of his goodness. And thus he was able easily to free his own men,
even though they were taken prisoners by his enemies, and no less a
person than king Swain himself.

3. It so happened that once upon a time as Swain was harrying in
Bretland [Wales], and at the first he won the victory and took much
plunder, but as he was foraging far away into the land away from
his ships, there met him so great a troop of horsemen that he could
not withstand them. Then king Swain was taken, bound, and cast into
prison, and with him Thor-wald Codran's son and many other noble and
worshipful men. The next day there came a rich duke to the dungeon
[lit.: dark-room] with a great company to take Thor-wald out of the
dungeon [lit.: dark-room], because a little time before he had set
free the son of that same duke when he was taken prisoner, and sent
him home free to his father. The duke bade Thor-wald walk out and go
away free, but Thor-wald swore that he would by no means go forth alive
save king Swain were set loose and free with all his men. The duke did
this at once for his sake, as king Swain witnessed afterwards as he
sat at a noble feast with two other kings. And when the courses came
in, a certain steward spake, saying that there could never again be
a table so worthily set as this was where three such mighty kings
were eating out of one dish. Then king Swain answered, smiling,
'I can find a stranger, a yeoman's son, who alone hath in himself,
if a right valuation were taken thereof, in no way less nobility and
honour than all we three kings together.' Now at these words there was
great merriment in the hall, and they all asked laughingly, 'Where and
who can this man be that he speaks so much praise of?' He answered,
'This man of whom I am speaking here, is as wise as befits a great
king, as strong and bold as the sturdiest bear-sark, and as courteous
and well-mannered as the most gentle sage.' Then he told that story
of Thor-wald that was just now written, how he freed the king by his
friendship and by reason of the many noble and praiseworthy deeds
that he had done.

[Here follows an enlarged paraphrase of the story of the stone
worshipped by Codran, of which only the following passages that
contain fresh traits of interest are worth giving in this place.]

4. Codran sees bishop Frederic doing his service. And on the same day
he came to his son Thor-wald and spake: 'Now I have seen and laid it
somewhat to mind, what earnest service ye do your God; moreover, as far
as I can perceive, our faiths are far apart, for it is clear to me that
your God is to be pleased with the light which our gods dread. And if
it be so as I think, then this man whom thou callest the bishop of you,
is your diviner or soothsayer, for I can see that thou gettest from him
all the things which thou art preaching to us on thy God's behalf. But
I have another diviner who does me much good. He tells me beforehand
many things before they happen. He takes care of my cattle, and reminds
me of what I have to do, and what I am to beware of, wherefore I have
a great refuge in him, and I have worshipped him all my life long;
but he dislikes thee very much, and also thy diviner [the bishop], and
your way of faith, and he dissuades me from paying any respect to you,
and most of all against taking your faith.' Thor-wald spake: 'Where
doth thy diviner dwell?' Codran answers, 'Here he lives a short way
from my house in a great and comely stone.' Thor-wald asked how long
he had lived there. Codran said that he had lived there a long time.



[Thor-wald says he is a devil.]

Codran answers, 'It is easy for me to see that your bishop's views
and his are very far apart, and I perceive no less that each of you
pleadeth his case with vigour; and all the things that ye say of him,
the very same things he bringeth forward about you; but what needs
it to speak more thereon? This covenant that thou hast proposed
will prove the truth.' Thor-wald was glad of his father's words,
and told the bishop all that they had agreed upon, and their talk
together. On the next day after this the bishop hallowed water, and
then went with prayer and psalm-singing, and sprinkled the water
all about the stone, and he poured it also over the stone so that
it was all wet. The night after Codran's diviner came to him in a
vision, and with downcast countenance and trembling as for fear,
he spake to Codran: 'Thou hast done ill in asking here men that brew
treason against thee, so that they seek to drive me out of my house,
for they poured boiling water over my lodging, so that my children
suffer no small torment from the burning drops that drip in through
the thatch, and though it doth not hurt me myself much, all the same
it is grievous to listen to the wail of small children as they cry
with their burns.' [The sprinkling is again repeated.]

On the next night following the false diviner appeared again to Codran
in very different guise to that in which he was wont to appear to him
with bright and blithe countenance and nobly arrayed, but now he was
in black and paltry raw-hide jacket, dark and evil of countenance,
and spake thus to the franklin with a sorrowful and quaking voice:
'These men are firmly bent on robbing us both of our goods and profits,
since they wish to drive me away from mine own heritage, and bereave
thee of my loving care and provident divination. Now, play the man,
and drive them away, so that we may not lack all good things by
reason of their wickedness, for I shall never fly; nevertheless it
is grievous to endure for long all their evil deeds, and....' [The
sprinkling is repeated a third time.] But the wicked spirit showed
himself to the franklin the night after with pitiful countenance,
and brought up this lamentation after the following fashion, with
broken voice, saying thus: 'This wicked traitor, the bishop of the
Christians, has bereft me of all my lands; he has spoilt my lodging;
poured boiling water over me, soaked my clothes, torn and made them
useless withal, and he has committed arson, such as cannot be atoned
for, upon me and my household; moreover he hath perforce driven me
now far away into waste places and outlawry. And now we must needs
sever both our neighbourliness and our friendship, and all this hath
been brought about by thy lack of good faith alone. Bethink thee now,
who will hereafter care for thy goods so carefully as I have done up
till now? Thou callest thyself an upright and faithful man, but thou
hast repaid me evil for good!' Then answered Codran, 'I did worship
thee as a profitable and strong god as long as I was not aware of the
truth, but now that I have proved thee full of falsehood and very
weak, therefore it is right and blameless for me to forsake thee,
and flee to the shelter of that Godhead which is much better and
stronger than thou.' With that they parted with enmity, and no cheer
at all. [Of course Codran is baptized.]

Next spring the bishop and Thor-wald went west to Lithe-dale with
their company, and set up housekeeping at Beck-moot, and dwelt there
four winters, and went forth in these years far and wide over Iceland
preaching God's word.

5. On the first season that they were at Beck-moot Thor-wald asked
that there should be given him to wife a woman named Wig-dis. She was
daughter of An-laf, who dwelt at Hawk-gill in Water-dale. But when the
bishop and Thor-wald came to the feast, there was a great gathering of
heathen men there. There was a great hall, as was then much the custom,
and there ran a little brook across the hall, well cared for. But
neither side, Christian or heathen, would eat with each other, and
therefore this counsel was taken, to hang a curtain across the hall
in the midst where the brook ran. The bishop was to be by the door
of the hall with the Christian men, and the heathens inside within
the curtain. [The story of the two bear-sarks Hawk is put in here,
how they and bishop Frederic test the truth of each faith by walking
through fires. The bear-sarks perish.] They were carried up the gill
and buried there, wherefore the place was called Hawk's-gill....

This occurrence [the feast probably] Gunlaug the monk says that he
heard a truthful man, Glum Thor-gils' son, tell, and Glum had got it
from a man named Arn-or, who was the son of Arn-dis.

An-laf of Hawk's-gill afterwards made a church at his homestead,
and Thor-wald gave him the wood for it.



[After the story of Clamp's fire and Hedin's hate.]

Now though they endured much wrong from wicked men, they did not any
the more refrain from going round the country setting forth God's
errand. They removed to Lax-water-dale, and sojourned there for a
time under Eilif's-fell with Atle the Strong, Thor-wald's father's
brother. Atle was then baptized with all his servants, and many other
men that they came to, because the grace of the Holy Ghost touched
or came upon them by reason of their words.

6. The report of the bishop flew, by God's gift, into the ears of
a little boy five winters old, whose name was Ingi-mund, the son
of Hafr o' God-dales. He was in fosterage at Reek-strand. Ingi-mund
fell into talk one day with his foster-father's shepherd, and asked
him to take him secretly to Eilif's-fell to see the bishop. The
shepherd consented. They went over Ceartan's-geow, and went over the
fell to Lax-water-dale. And as soon as they came to Atle's house at
Eilif's-fell the boy began to pray to be baptized. Atle took the boy by
the hand, and led him to the bishop, saying, 'This boy is the son of a
nobleman, albeit a heathen, and the boy begs to be baptized, though it
is without the consent or counsel of his father or foster-father. Now
look to it what is to be done, for it is surely to be looked for that
it will displease both of them greatly if he be baptized.' The bishop
answered, laughing, 'Verily,' said he, 'such a holy office cannot be
denied to a young boy, and the rather in that he hath a more wholesome
understanding in his mind than his grown-up kinsfolk.' Then the bishop
baptized Ingi-mund, and taught him before he went away what were the
chief things it was needful for him to know as a Christian.

7. It is said that bishop Frederic had baptized a certain man whose
name was Mane [Moon], and because he held the holy faith with many
virtues and good living he was called Mane the Christian. He dwelt
at Holt in Colge-mire. He built a church there. In this church he
served God both day and night with holy prayers and alms-giving,
which he bestowed in many ways upon poor folk. He had a fishing-stead
in the river there not very far from his house, which even now-a-days
is still called by his name, Mane's-force, for once upon a time when
there was great famine and hunger, he had nought to feed the hungry
withal, so he went to the river and there he had salmon enough in the
deep water under the force. This salmon-fishing he endowed the church
of Holt with, and Gunlaug the monk says that this fishery has ever
since belonged to that church. Hard by the church there is a mark to
be seen of his having lived like an anchorite, for just as he was
far away from most people of that day in his mind, so he wished,
with regard to bodily presence, to be far from the common crowd,
for over against the churchyard it is to be seen that there had been
a certain walled garth, where it is told that he worked at haymaking
in the summer to get fodder enough for the one cow whereby he lived,
for he wished to earn his livelihood by the work of his own hands
rather than live in common with heathen men whom he hated, and this
place is since called Mane's-garth.

Thor-wald lived many years afterwards, and inasmuch as he was a
distinguished man, strong and stout of heart, and in all places
a keeper of God's commandments with perfect love, he bethought him
that if he were to go back to his foster-land that it was not certain
whether he could endure in all places, as he ought to do for the love
of God, the onslaught and insults of his countrymen. Wherefore he took
this counsel not to visit Iceland again, and he set forth on his way
out into the world as far as Jerusalem to see the Holy Places. He
went over all the land of the Greeks and reached Mickle-garth. The
Throne-king himself received him with much worship, and gave him many
noble friendly gifts, for God's grace was so nigh unto him, and his
report flew over all the nations wheresoever he came, that he was held
worthy by all men, whether small or great, as a pillar and upholder
of the true Faith, and so honoured as a glorious confessor of our
Lord Jesus Christ by the Kayser of Mickle-garth himself and all his
princes, and no less by all the bishops and abbots over all the land
of Greece and Syria, but most of all was he honoured in the East-Way
[Baltic lands], when he was sent there by the Kayser as a ruler or
officer placed over all the kings in Russia and in all Garth-ric
[N. Russia]. Thor-wald Codran's son raised there from the foundation
a noble monastery by the head church [cathedral] that is hallowed to
John the Baptist, and endowed it with certain lands. And it hath been
called ever after by his name, Thor-wald's Cloister. In this minster
he ended his life, and there also he is buried. This cloister stands
under a high rock that is called Dropn [1340].

When bishop Frederic and Thor-wald came to Iceland there were passed
from the Incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ nine hundred years and
one year of the ninety [981], and a hundred, ten told, and six winters
from the beginning of the Settlement of Iceland. Three winters later
Thor-ward Spac-Beadwere's son set up a church in Áse.

There was a man named Stephen. He was the son of Thor-gils, the son
of Eilif, the son of Helge, the son of Cetil Flat-neb, the son of
Beorn Buna. Stephen was born at Keel-ness, and grew up there while
he was a child. Stephen went abroad while he was young, and received
the faith in Denmark, and became a man of mark.

Stephen went to meet Thor-wald Cod-ran's son and went with him far
and wide over the world to see the Holy Places and the ways of mighty
men. At last Stephen turned back to the North-lands, and met An-laf
Tryggvason west of the Sea, and became his man, and went with An-laf
Tryggvason from the west to Norway.






CHAPTER 2

§ 2. EARLY CHURCH LEGENDS.


There are a few little tales in the style of the Islendinga Sogor,
wholly akin to the story of Aswolf, as given in Landnama-book,
Lib. I. 7, (which we might have taken thence and placed with them
here, where in logical sequence they would belong,) that give the few
traditions handed down to us of Christianity before the missions in
Iceland. They are positively dated by reference to pedigrees and to
the famine (975). They are of much use in giving an insight into the
spirit of the new Christian life as it appeared against the heathen
background.

There must have been more of these tales, which would almost have
risen to the rank of Legenda Sanctorum to those who after 1001
looked back upon their heroes as, in the truest sense, confessors
and martyrs. Names such as Thor-laf (p. 401), Groa (Ld. II. 21. 2),
Orlyg (I. 6), Eor-wind (I. 7. 3), Cetil the Fool (IV. 16. 1),
and others--even the names of places such as Cross-wick, Kirk-by,
Patrick's-frith--speak to those memories.

The tales of Swade and Thor-hall Knop are of this character. The third
tale, that of Thidrande, is of a weird, half-pagan character, and,
like the lost Brian's Saga, is concerned with the pagan forebodings
and threatenings of the Advent of the New Faith. Nial's Saga, in
one of its genealogies, speaks of 'Thidrande, whom the díses or
spirit-women slew,' confirming the age of the tradition upon which
the story is founded.

The MSS. upon which our text rests are those of Tryggvason's Life, in
which these pieces are inserted as episodes, viz. AM. 61, Flatey-book,
Berg-book, and the fragmentary AM. 53, 54, 62.

To save space we have given no text, only translations. The stories
have all been preserved through being inserted in the big Olaf
Tryggvason's Saga, and are found published in Flatey-book, vol. i;
Fornm. S. vol. ii. The story of Thidrande is besides given in the
Icel. Reader, 1879. It is here we are able to make our only text
emendation.

There is an emendation in the tale of Thidrande, where all the
MSS. read 'uitgerdar mikit,' which makes no sense. We read 'úti gráð
mikit,' the difference lying between 'uitg'ð' and 'útig'ð' (p. 418,
l. 12 from bottom). The consensus of the MSS. shows that they all
follow one archetype.


Swade and the Poor.

Some time after the journey out of bishop Frederic and Thor-wald
Cod-ran's son, there came about such a great famine in Iceland that
many men died of hunger. There dwelt then in Shaw-frith a certain man
of rank, and a very cruel man, whose name was Swade, at the place
afterwards called Swade-stead. It came to pass one morning that he
called together many poor men, and bade them make a great grave and
deep, a short way from the highway; and the poor men were fain if they
might by the wage of their toil somewhat slake their sore hunger;
and in the evening, when they had finished the making of the grave,
Swade led them all into a little house, then he fastened the house,
and said to them that were within, 'Rejoice and be glad, for soon
shall your misery be brought to an end. Ye shall abide here to-night,
and in the morning ye shall be slain and buried here in this great
grave that ye have yourselves made.' But when they heard this cruel
doom that they were to get death for their toil, they began to weep
with sore sorrow all through the night. It happened that Thor-ward
the Christian, Spac-Beadwere's son, was going that very night up
through the district on his errands, and his path lay very early in
the morning by this same house wherein the poor men lay; and when he
heard their lamentable cry he asked what grieved them. And when he
was made aware of the truth by them he spake to them: 'Let us make
a bargain together: if ye will do as I saith, if ye will believe in
the true God whom I believe in, and do according to what I say, then
I will free you hence. Then ye shall come to my house in Ridge, and I
will feed you all.' They said they would gladly do so. Then Thor-ward
took the bar from the door, and they went forth at once rejoicing
with great haste to his house down at Ridge. But when Swade was aware
of this he grew mighty wroth, started at once, armed himself and his
men, and rode with all haste after the runaways, meaning to take and
slay them; and in the second place he was minded to repay cruelly
the dishonour he thought he had gotten from him that had loosed them;
but his evil thoughts and wickedness fell upon his own head, for just
as he was riding hard along by the grave he fell off horseback and
was straightway dead as soon as he reached the ground. And in that
same grave which he had prepared for innocent men was he himself, a
guilty heathen, buried by his followers, and with him his hound and
his horse, after the old way. But Thor-ward o' Ridge let the priest
that he had with him baptize the poor men that he had set free from
death, and teach them the holy doctrines [creeds and paternoster],
and he fed them all there at his house as long as the famine lasted.

Most men say that Thor-ward, Spac-Beadwere's son, was baptized
by bishop Frederic, but Gunlaug the monk tells this, that some men
believe him to have been baptized in England, and that thence he had
brought the wood for the church which he had made on his farm.

At the same time, as was spoken of just before, it was made law at
a moot of the men of the hundred, that because of the hunger and
so great famine, men were allowed to cast off the aged and even
deny them shelter, and also others who were lamed, or stricken with
diseases, and that none should harbour them. The bitterest gale and
gnashing frost was then beating upon them. The greatest chief then
on the country side was Arnor Carline-neb, who dwelt at Mickle-by on
Os-land's-lithe. But when Arnor came home from this meeting his mother
Thor-id, the daughter of Ref o' Bard, came up to him and rebuked him
very grievously for having been consenting when such a cruel law was
made. She pleaded before him with great clearness and many true words
what unheard-of and unnatural inhumanity it was that a man should give
over his father and mother or other kinsfolk to so cruel a death. 'Now
know thou for a certain,' says she, 'that though thou do not such
things thyself, thou art not at all without part and lot in such
wicked manslaughters, for thou art a chief and a leader of others,
if thou givest leave to the men under thee to put their fathers and
mothers and next of kin out of doors in the storm. Yea, and just the
same is it, though thou give them no leave, if thou do not withstand
such misdeeds with all thy might.' Arnor understood the good intent
of his mother, and took her rebuke well, and became very thoughtful
as to what he should do; wherefore he took this counsel to send his
servants to the next homesteads to gather together all the aged and
those that were driven out, 'and bring them to me, and let them be
nurtured with all kindliness.' The next day he called a gathering of
franklins. And when Arnor came to the meeting he spoke thus to them:
'It is known to you that we had a great gathering a short time ago,
but I have since thought over our common necessity, and compared it
with the inhuman course which we all agreed upon when we gave leave to
put to death the aged and all those who cannot maintain themselves by
earning their livelihood; and now, being overcome by these reasons,
I repent me greatly of this so wicked and unexampled cruelty; and
now, by taking thought, I have formed this plan which we shall all
have and hold, that is, that each man show humanity and mercy to
his fellow men, so that every one help his kindred as far as ever
his means go in the first place, especially his father and mother,
and in the next place that those who can shall fend off hunger and
peril of life from their other near kinsfolk. And to this end we
will lay out all our means and our live stock to defend the life of
men, and slay for the succour of our kinsmen our horses rather than
let our kin perish of hunger, so that no franklin shall hereafter
keep at his house more than two horses. Moreover with regard to the
evil habit which has found furtherance, of men keeping many dogs,
so that many men might live by the meat which is given to them, now
men shall slay the dogs so that few or none be left alive, and use,
for food to save the life of man, that which aforetime was wont to
be given to the dogs. And it is the quickest way to say at once that
by no means will we give any of you leave, who by any means may give
them any help whatever, to cast off his father or mother; but he who
hath not the wherewithal to maintain his father and mother and his
next of kin, let him bring them to my house in Mickle-by and I will
feed them, but he that may and will not give succour to his next of
kin, him I shall cruelly pay to the utmost of my power.' ['Now then,
my dear friends and fellows, rather than lieges, let us uphold in all
ways humanity and mercy towards our nearest of kin, and give no hold
to our enemies to reproach us that we have with too great folly dealt
so unrighteously with our neighbours as we were about to do. Now if
he be a true God who hath made the sun that it may light and warm the
world, and if saintly and righteous men please him as we have heard
say, then let him show us his mercy so that we may prove indeed that
he is the maker of men, and that he is mighty to steer and rule all
the universe, and thereby we may believe in him, and worship no god
save him only, true and blessed in his power.'

And when Arnor had spoken this, Thorward, Spac-Beadwere's son,
who stood by, spoke and said as follows: 'This is now clear, Arnor,
that the same God that thou didst speak of in thy speech hath sent
his Holy Spirit into thy breast to put forth such blessed humanity
as thou hast now set forth to men in thy speech. And I think this,
that if king An-laf had heard thee say such words, he would have
given thanks to God and thee for such fair furtherance; and therefore
I think that when he shall get news of such doings that he will be
wondrous fain, and indeed it is great pity for us that we cannot see
him or hear his words, neither of which I am afraid we shall do.']

And when all they that were come together agreed that it was with a
good will he had spoken, they broke up the moot.

There was then the sharpest cold and frost as there had been for a
long time, and the cruellest north winds; and ice all over the ground,
and the hardest coat of ice spread over all the earth, so that no
grass came through it. But on the next night after this meeting, by
divine providence, the mutability of the sky took so sudden a turn,
that the morning after all the cruelty of the frost was away, and
there were come instead the warm south wind and the best thaw. And
from that day there came mild weather and bright melting sunshine. And
the earth began to show itself day after day, so that within a little
while all cattle got grass enough for its maintenance, and all men that
had hearkened to the merciful counsel Arnor had given them were merry
and very joyful, and received such ample return of divine gifts that
therefore all Arnor's liegemen, men and women, quickly and joyfully
followed their chief in taking upon them the holy conversation of the
right faith, which was preached to them a little later. For within
a few winters' delay Christianity became law over all Iceland.


Thorhall Knop.

There was a man named Thor-hall Knop. He dwelt at Knop-stead in
Fleet. He was of noble family. His forebears had dwelt there before
him. Thor-hall was a man of good life, though he was a heathen, as were
then most folk in those parts. He was sorely taken and oppressed by
leprosy. Thor-hall used to sacrifice to false gods, after the manner
of his kinsfolk. There was a mighty temple not far from his homestead,
where all the Fleet-men held a sacrifice once every year.

One night as Thor-hall slept in his bed he dreamed that he thought
he was out of doors, and he saw a bright man riding to his house on
a white horse, arrayed in royal raiment, and holding a gold-mounted
spear in his hand. And when Thor-hall saw this man draw near the house,
there fell upon him dread, and he tried to turn into the house, but
the knight was quicker than he, and leapt off his horse and went in
front of the door, saying, 'Thou shalt not be afraid, for there shall
no harm come to thee from me or my coming here; rather thou shouldest
receive by my coming hither healing and joy, if thou wilt hearken to
my counsel. Dost thou grieve at thy sickness? But I need not ask thee
this, for I know that thou art grieved thereby. Follow me now, for
I shall show a sure cure.' The new-comer led him to a certain place
out of the house-yard that lay round the house, and spake to him:
'In this place thou shalt build a house in honour of the true God,
according as I shall show thee. But this God ye shall hear of this
very year at the All-moot, for of a truth thou shalt ride thither
this summer. Now, if thou worship with pure heart the God that shall
be preached to thee there, thou shalt be whole, and with a whole body
thou shalt enjoy peace and bliss in this world, and in the world to
come everlasting honour and blessedness.' Then he plotted out the
foundation walls in the house-yard before Thor-hall with the butt of
his spear, and spake thus to him:--

'After this fashion shalt thou make the house, and take for it the
wood that is now in thy temple that is here a short way from thy
house, whither thou and the men of thy district are wont to seek and
to hold there their sacrificial feasts every year. This temple thou
shalt pull down straightway in the morning when thou shalt rise up,
and the false gods whom thou hast adored till now, thou shalt never
worship again. Now, if thou believe my words, and pay heed without any
doubt to the things that I have bidden thee, then thou shalt shortly
begin to mend, and thou shalt grow stronger from day to day.' And
with that the vision disappeared from before him.

But when Thor-hall awoke he believed the vision, and as soon as it was
day he bade all his workmen go forthwith and break down the temple and
bring all the wood home to his house. And though they murmured thereat,
and said among themselves that he must be mad, nevertheless they dared
not speak against his command, but carried out fully that which he had
told them to do. Then Thor-hall began to build a house, according in
all to that fashion and size which had been shown to him in his dream.

[But though historians have not full knowledge as to who it was
that appeared to Thor-hall, it is thought likely that God himself had
manifested his will through the bodily shape of king An-laf Tryggvason,
who shortly after preached to him and many others help and healing
by his own messenger on God's great errand. And from this also men
conclude so respecting this vision that a worshipful man appeared to
Thor-hall with royal array, and a little later he heard the royal
message with which the messengers of king An-laf himself preached
openly to all the people, the orthodox and true faith.]

At the same time there dwelt a little way off, at the next homestead,
a woman whose name was Thor-hild. She was a strong woman and a great
sorceress. On the same night as the aforesaid vision appeared before
Thor-hall, Thor-hild woke her men up early in the morning, as soon
as it was light, and said as followeth: 'Ye shall go as quickly as
may be and drive together and home out of the pastures all thy live
stock, both neat and sheep and horses, and shut them up in the byres
or folds, for none of them shall keep alive that is out of doors
here to-day. For Thor-hall, my neighbour at Knop-stead, is gone mad
and out of his wits, so that he hath sent his men to break down that
worshipful temple that standeth there, and therefore the worshipful
gods that have long been adored there must needs flee away in angry
mood withal, and I think that they will seek shelter and an abode
all the way north in Mast-ness. Now therefore I wish my stock not to
be in their way, for they are so wroth and in such bitter mood that
they will spare nought that shall stand before them.' And now it was
done as she had commanded, and all her live stock were driven home
and shut up, save one pack-horse that had stayed behind in the hayes,
and he was afterwards found dead.

But with Thor-hall o' Knop-stead all went according to the vision
that had appeared to him. He began to mend of his ailment day by day,
and his strength grew. He rode to moot in the summer, and met there
the men that were setting forth Christian preaching, as shall shortly
be told. Then Thor-hall took the true faith, and he was then first
entirely whole of his body when he was baptized. After that he went
home rejoicing, and worshipped Almighty God all the days of his life
with [true] service in the church which he had hallowed and first
built at Fleet, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Ghost, to Whom be honour and glory, one God in Trinity,
world without end. Amen.


The Tale of Thidrande.

1. There was a man of Norway whose name was Thor-hall. He came out
to Iceland in the days of earl Harold Sigrodsson. He settled in
Sour-beck-mouth and dwelt at Harrows-land. Thor-hall was a sage
and much of a seer, and he was called Thor-hall the Spae-man or
Diviner. While he was dwelling at Harrows-land, Hall o' Side was
dwelling at Temple in Elfet's-frith, and there was the greatest
friendship between them. Hall used to come as guest to Harrows-land
every summer as he rode to the moot; and Thor-hall often went to stay
there [with Hall] in the east for a long time. The name of Hall's
eldest son was Thidrande. He was the most fair and promising of men,
and Hall loved him best of all his sons. Thidrande went a voyaging
between lands [i.e. he became a merchant trader] as soon as he was
old enough. He was much beloved everywhere he went, for he was the
most accomplished of men, and gentle and blithe to every child.

2. It came to pass one summer that Hall, as he rode back from the
moot, asked Thor-hall his friend to his house in the east. Thor-hall
rode east [thither] somewhat later than Hall, and Hall received him
with great kindness, as he was ever wont to do. Thor-hall abode there
through the summer, and Hall said that he should not go home till the
harvest feast was at an end. That summer Thidrande came out to Iceland
into Bear-frith. He was then eighteen years old. He came home to his
father's house, and men admired him greatly as they had often before,
and praised his accomplishments; but Thor-hall the Diviner always held
his peace when men were praising him most. And on a time Hall asked him
why it was 'that thou dost not say aught about my son Thidrande, for I
think that which thou sayest is to be remembered,' says he. Thor-hall
answered, 'It is not that aught in him or thee mislike me, nor that
I see less than others that he is a most notable man; but rather it
is for this reason: there are many praising him, and he has great
deserts though he sets little by himself, but it may well be that
ye will not be able long to rejoice in him, and then the regret for
thy son will be great enough, such a noble fellow as he is, although
every one do not praise his gifts to thy face.' But as the summer
wore on Thor-hall began to be very sorrowful. Hall asked him what
it was. Thor-hall answered, 'I look for ill to come of this harvest
feast that is to be here, for I have a foreboding that a diviner will
be slain at this feast.' 'I can clear up that,' says the franklin;
'I have an ox ten years old whom I call Diviner, because he is wiser
than any of the other neat, and he is to be slain at the harvest
feast. Therefore let not this make thee sorrowful, for I mean that
this feast, like the others, shall be an honour to thee and my other
friends.' Answers Thor-hall, 'I did not make mention of this because
I was afraid for my own life, and I have a foreboding of greater and
more wondrous tidings than I am minded now to proclaim.' Said Hall,
'There is no reason why the feast should not be put off.' Answers
Thor-hall, 'It will not do to speak so, for what is fated must happen.'

3. The feast was made ready at the winter nights [8-10 Oct.]. Few of
them that were bidden came, for the weather was sharp and very foul
weather out of doors. And when men sat down to table in the evening,
Thor-hall spake: 'I am about to ask men to pay heed to my counsel on
this head, that no man here go out of doors to-night, for great evil
will ensue thereby if this be not strictly kept. And whatever portents
may happen, let men pay no heed thereto, for ill will come of it if
any answer be made thereto.' Hall commanded men to keep Thor-hall's
commands, 'for they never fail, and it is better to bind up a whole
limb [than an ailing one].'

Thidrande was serving the guests, for he was meek and lowly now as
always. And as men were going to bed, Thidrande gave his own bed
up to a guest, and cast himself down on a bench outside next the
cross-wainscot. And when almost all men were asleep, there was a call
at the door, but no man made as if he heard it; and this happened
thrice. Then Thidrande sprang up and said, 'It is a great shame that
every one should feign to be asleep; surely these are guests come.' He
took his sword in his hand and went out, but saw no man. Then it
came into his mind that some of the guests must have ridden on first
to the house, and then gone back to meet them that rode behind the
rest. Then he went along under the wood-pile and heard the din of
folks riding into the house-garth from the north. He saw that there
were nine women all in black clothes and with drawn swords in their
hands. He heard also folks riding from the south into the garth. There
were also nine women all in bright raiment and on white horses. Then
Thidrande was minded to go back to the house and tell men of the
sight, but now the black-clad women came up first and set upon him,
and he defended himself manfully.

But a long time later Thor-hall woke, and asked whether Thidrande was
awake, and got no answer. Then he said that it must be too late. Then
men went about the houses inside and then out of doors, and it was
moonlight night and frosty weather, and they found Thidrande lying
wounded, and he was carried indoors. And when men got word of him,
he told them all that had appeared to him. He died the same morning
at daylight, and was laid in an howe after the old way.

4. Afterwards there were held enquiries of the movements of men, but
there were none known likely to be Thidrande's enemies. Hall asked
Thor-hall what he thought would come of this wonderful portent that
had happened. Thor-hall answered, 'I do not know, but I can guess
this, that these women can have been no others than the fetches of
you and your kinsmen, and I think that there will come about a change
of faith here, and that very shortly there will come a better faith
hither to this land. And I believe that these fairies or spirits of
yours, who follow the old faith, must have known of the change of
faith beforehand, and therewithal that ye and your kindred would cast
them off: and it must be that they could not bear to get no tribute
of you before, and therefore they have taken Thidrande as their own
share; but the brighter [1341] spirits must have wished to help him,
and not been able to come in time to do so. Albeit ye kinsmen that
shall hold the unknown faith, which they forebode and follow, shall
be blessed by them.' But Hall felt the death of his son Thidrande so
much that he could not rest any longer at the homestead at Temple,
and then he moved his dwelling to Thwart-water.

5. It came to pass once at Thwart-water, when Thor-hall the Diviner was
there on a visit with Hall, that Hall lay in a berth and Thor-hall
on another bed in the same room, and there was a window-hole in
the berth, and one morning when they both awoke, Thor-hall fell a
laughing. Said Hall, 'What art thou laughing at?' Thor-hall answered,
'I am laughing because I see every hillock opening and every living
thing big or small trussing up his baggage, and making flitting-day
of it.' And a little later these tidings [the Change of Faith] came
about which shall now be told.




CHAPTER 3

§ 3. THE LIVES OF THE FIRST SEVEN BISHOPS OF SCALHOLT.

The author of Hunger-waker, as we dub him from his most important
work, we know only from his own words as the contemporary of bishops
Thorlac and Paul, as living in Scalholt, and as being in the household
of bishop Paul. He must have been a friend or dependent of bishop
Thorlac, and he was at his funeral, hearing Gizor's address, as it
appears from his own words. Of all those whom he mentions in his
works as present during the scenes he recounts there is none whom
we could with certainty identify with him; it is easier, indeed,
to show whom he is not than whom he is.

From the words of his Life of Bishop Paul (ch. xv) it would seem that
he was of near kin to that bishop, who did not however leave him any
particular legacy, but apparently recommended him to the bounty of his
children, who were well enough off to provide for such persons. Very
possibly therefore he was not of the bishop's own blood, but of his
wife's; hence the bishop would not be bound in any way to do more
than make some such provision for him as he would for any other
of his friends and chaplains. Thorlac, Herdis' brother (d. 1240),
who was comforted by the bishop after Herdis' death, is perhaps a
little too young to have written these Lives, but he might be the
man if he were not born later than 1170. (See Sturlunga Pedigrees,
vol. ii. 485, the Hitar-dale family.) In Aron's Saga he is called
'gofug-menne mikit' and 'vitr maðr, heill vinom sínom, ok iamnan
at ráðom sóttr.' The muffled way in which the terrible story of the
death of bishop Magnus is told (the host was Thorlac's grandfather)
would suit one of the Hitar-dale family. How it contrasts, indeed,
with Sturla o' Hwam's banter, Sturl. i. pp. 68-69!

His work--the Lives of the First Seven Bishops of Scalholt--reaches us
in three separate pieces, which we believe must have been composed at
different dates, namely, Hunger-waker, Thorlac's Life, and Paul's Life,
of which Thorlac's was possibly the first and Paul's certainly the
last written. Thorlac's Life was written probably by order or desire
of some great man, and it would seem that this task led the author
on to set down the earlier bishops' lives, chiefly resting them upon
the recollections of Gizor Hallsson, who died aged c. 82, July 6,
1206, and who in his long life had seen and known all the bishops
save the first two that are mentioned in Hunger-waker. Thorlac the
first had been his foster-father, and he had stood at the graves of
him and all his successors till his own death.

St. Thorlac's Life we should put shortly before 1206, the date of
Gizor's death, and after 1200, when the great event of his canonization
by national desire in 1200 took place, though the bishop died in
1193. The frequent, though somewhat laboured, citations from the
Bible and the pious remembrances it contains make it a charming work.

Hunger-waker would claim priority if we consider the words of the last
paragraph as referring to the date of composition, rather than to the
arrangement of the lives in order in the author's autograph. There
is also a naïveté about the style of this which is distinct from the
riper and fuller style of bishop Paul's Life, with its more realistic
atmosphere. The language of the last paragraph seems conclusive as
to the author of Hunger-waker being also the author of Thorlac's
Life. Whether the Hunger-waker was composed in Gizor's lifetime or
after his death depends upon the way one understands the Prologue, §
2. Gizor is not referred to as 'the late,' nor any precise form of
words used such as are appropriate to the mention of the honoured
dead. Gizor had left Scalholt before his death, and it may well
be that this book was the result of Gizor's last conversations and
reminiscences. If so the work should date from c. 1200-1206, about
the same date as Thorlac's Life, and there cannot be much interval
between them whichever be put first.

The date of bishop Paul's Life must be after Nov. 1211, the date of his
death, but not very long one would say. The style is more natural and
homely and of less effort. That the author formed one of the bishop's
household, and that he writes from personal knowledge, his words
show. That the author of this Life was the author of Hunger-waker
none have doubted: even the Editor of 1778 saw that it was so. The
very fact that the author slurs over the political life of Thorlac,
and keeps to his saintly or religious life, is an additional proof
of his identity, for, to a friend of bishop Paul, the contests which
Thorlac waged would be such delicate ground as could hardly be stirred
during Paul's life without his grave displeasure, for Ragneid was
bishop Paul's mother, and John Loftson his father.

The chronology followed is that which, from its being followed
by Abbot Carl in Sverri's Saga, we have before called the Thingore
system, its peculiarity being that the birth of Christ is dated seven
years earlier than in the commonly received system. Thus bishop Paul,
according to this reckoning, died 1204, not, as we should count it,
1211. It is possible that the Hunger-waker author was the originator
of this system, which was followed by several Icelandic writers. The
Second Biographer of Thorlac does not use this system, but adjusts the
dates of the earlier Life to the received chronology. The Hunger-waker
author knew Are's works, uses Libellus and cites it, and has borrowed
from Are the system of summing up an epoch in a curious annalistic
way with synchronisms.

Of Hunger-waker and Paul's Life we find no mention by any author
or in any catalogue till the Revival of Learning in Iceland, and
as for the Life of Thorlac, which occurs in several inventories,
it seems to be the 13th-century interpolated edition of this work,
not the original A text.

When Hunger-waker came to be known it excited some attention, and
John Egilsson was spurred on not only to abstract it, but to write on
its pattern, or rather on its suggestion, the Lives of the Bishops
of the Reformation--a curious instance of the influence a good book
will exercise long years after all it dealt with has passed away, the
form and spirit only remaining. John does not imitate his prototype
in style, but runs on in his own babbling way in the simple, almost
childish, style of a pioneer of letters.

The Hunger-waker text depends upon a single lost vellum, of which
there is no mention or trace whatever till after 1600. If it had been
lost before then we should have no suspicion that such a work had
ever existed. In the year 1601 John Egilsson made an abstract of it
(AM. 110, 8o, autograph), and in the next following years (1601 to
1606) composed, in imitation of it, his Continuation of it, as he
calls his Lives of Bishops. Errors in common tend to show that the
vellum he abstracted from was the same from which the complete copies
were afterwards taken. Next it comes into Biorn o' Scardsa's hands:
he made extracts from it of which we have made use in checking the
later copies. The first full copy extant (AM. 380) dates from 1641,
and is by one of bishop Thorlac Sculason's copyists. The next is by
John Gizorarson, 1643, AM. 205, fol. But the one upon which our text
rests is AM. 379, 4o, a fine vellum copy made for bishop Thorlac in
1654. Whether it was taken from the lost archetype or not we cannot
tell, but most probably it was. No description of the lost archetype
has reached us, but it must have been a good and old MS., though not
wanting in copyist's mistakes and omissions.



------
FIGURE


[**ERROR: unhandled comment start]
                         + A (lost).
                              |
+=================+=============+==============+=================+
|                 |             |              |                 |
AM. 379,      AM. 205,       AM. 380,        Biorn,       John
Egilsson's,
1654,        J. G. 1643,   vellum, 1641,    c. 1630-40,        1601,
  \==============|==================/        extracts.        abstract.
            complete.
-->

------



From these three complete copies others were taken, and there are
about fifteen paper copies of various dates, but of no authority,
none being taken from A.

The vanishing of A is a mysterious phenomena, such as occurs more than
once in the history of Icelandic MSS., e.g. Sturla's Landnama-book,
Are's Libellus, Bishop Paul's Lives. One is tempted to think that some
such general catastrophe as a fire or wreck or accident in landing
goods must be accountable for it. If the vellums had suffered in an
ordinary way by being cut up for binding some shred must have remained.

The case of bishop Thorlac's Life is somewhat different; the material
is a little fuller, as we might have expected from the popularity
of its subject. Our text rests for the earlier part on the Stockholm
MS., Holm. 5, fol., a complete Icelandic vellum copy of the original
Saga taken about 1359-60, as we can tell from a list of bishops and
abbots it contains. The last bishop mentioned is Gurth, 'who hath been
bishop nine years.' Now Gurth was bishop 1349-60, hence this entry
was made 1359. The last abbot recorded is abbot Eyiolf of Thyckwa-by,
who ruled from 1352-77, which is confirmatory of the former date,
for the years of his abbacy are not given.

The history of this MS. is as follows. It left Iceland in 1656 as
a gift from bishop Bryniulf to Mr. Sefeld, a collector of books who
lived in Zealand. On his famous campaign against Copenhagen in 1659,
Carl Gustaf bought the fine library of Sefeld, and on his return home
incorporated the whole collection into his own Royal Library, where
the Thorlac MS. now stands bound in white vellum, a stately volume. It
contains other bishops' Lives besides that of Thorlac, and is indeed a
kind of Corpus of Icelandic Ecclesiastical History. Ere it left Iceland
John Gizorarson had copied it, c. 1643, and his copy, which is of no
value seeing that we have the original, is numbered AM. 205. In AM. 383
are small fragments of Thorlac's Life, which give us some help. One,
of two leaves, (a) supplies the story of Macan not found in Cod. Holm.

The editor of the second Life (see Introduction to § 5) used a copy
of A, into which he stuck his fresh 'thattr' or episode. This copy
he used freely, abridging, loosely transcribing, but otherwise adding
nothing. It is of great value in establishing the full text of A. We
have used it, correcting by it casual errors or slips in our A,
picking out whatever bears mark of being original. We mark it B.

For the first two-thirds of Thorlac's Life, Holm. 5 is our authority,
but as we find towards the end of this MS., as so often happens
in these big vellums, the scribe has flagged and betaken himself to
abridging instead of faithfully copying in extenso the original before
him. Hence we have to turn to B to get the complete original text.

Of the Bishops' Lives there were many paper transcripts in correlation,
but no printed edition till 1778, when at Copenhagen appeared the
editio princeps of Hunger-waker and Paul, with the tale of Thorwald
Codransson, and Latin translations.

The second edition is that by the editor in vol. i. of Biskopa Sögur,
which also contains the editio princeps of Thorlac's Life. This
volume came out in three fascicules--one in the spring of 1856, the
second in the spring of 1857, and the last, with introduction to the
whole, in 1858. In the first fascicule was comprised Hunger-waker,
which was the editor's prentice-essay in the handling of texts. It
was a tough job, and he made it harder by giving readings of more
MSS. than was necessary or useful. This volume was printed under the
plan and guidance of Mr. John Sigurdsson at the cost of the Icelandic
Literary Society, Mr. Sigurdsson himself editing Christne Saga, the
rest of the volume, with the introduction, being left to the editor.

It is no wonder, considering the foundation for the text of these
Bishops' Lives, that there should be many places which must be
corrected and emended to make sense. In this respect these biographies
are in the same position as many of the Greek and Latin classics and
unlike most other Icelandic works. The present edition is the first
in which these textual problems have been at least attempted.

The text of bishop Paul's Life rests, like Hunger-waker, upon a
single early vellum of which no notice or record is given, and
which mysteriously disappears without a trace. John Egilsson knew
no Life of Paul, hence it cannot have stood on the same vellum as
Hunger-waker. The first proof of its existence is the copy of 1643,
made by John Gizorarson into the same book as Hunger-waker, AM. 205. It
is not so trustworthy as might be wished for, John being rather free
in his handling of MSS., the second independent copy being now and
again closer to the original. It is in poor state and badly penned,
'a botch of a copy,' as Arne Magnusson somewhat unjustly calls it,
now numbered AM. 384. Since 1778 one leaf of it has dropped out and
been lost (probably in the hands of the editor of 1778; for it was
missing in 1856), for we know that this MS. was used and the lost
leaf cited in the editio princeps of Copenhagen of that year. The
original MS. must have been a good vellum and an old one.


------
FIGURE


[**ERROR: unhandled comment start]
                            + A (lost).
                               |
                      ================
                      |               |
                AM. 384 chart.     AM. 205,
                                 J. G. 1643.
-->

------



A couple of instances from the very preface to Hunger-waker will show
the necessity of the present edition and the kind of difficulty which
we have had to meet in making it. The 1858 edition reads in Prol. § 5
'tilgert,' which runs in the MS. 'tilg't,' but this makes no meaning,
and is a mere copyist's error for 'telgt.' The rare verb 'telgja' was
not known to the copyist who wrote down the common 'tilg't.' Again,
Prol. § 9, the old editions read 'þaðan at um vesa,' following their
MSS., but this makes no sense, and is merely the scribe's misreading
for 'þar annt um uesa;' the archetype must have read 'þ&#x0303;annt,'
which the scribe misread 'þ&#x0303;anat.' Ch. 3. 10, þat for jol,
and so on.

Nor have the copyists been content to make this class of faults;
they have done worse, omitted lines and words in several places. For
example, in the account of Hall's travels (Hungrv. 5. 1) they have made
a jumble of words by omitting a characteristic phrase of the original
which luckily the context helps one to restore, but there are some
places where we have no means of correcting their evident mistakes.

In the matter of spelling we have followed the analogy of the
Miracle-book (AM. 645), written under bishop Paul's own eyes at
Scalholt, in writing his own name 'Pol' and his father's 'Ioan,'
Gizoerr for Gizorr--these spellings representing the pronunciations
of Paul and his contemporary the author of Hunger-waker. Cloengr,
Ann. Reg. s. a. 1151; Cloeíngr, s. a. 1176; Cloingus, the Lat. Legend,
Bs. i. 294; but Clongr, Bs. i. 355, bottom.





[[59: 1.]]


HER BYRJAR HUNGRVOCO.


[Prologus.]


1. Boekling þenna kalla-ek Hunger-voco: af þvi at svá mon maorgom
maonnom ó-fróðom ok þó vitrom [1342] gefet vesa, þeim es hann hafa yfer
faret, at miklo mundo [1343] goerr vilja vita upp-raós ok æve þeirra
merkis-manna, es her verðr fátt frá sagt í þesse skraó. En ek hefe
þó nálega aollo við sleget, at ríta, þat5 sem ek hefe í minne fest.

2. Hefe-ek af því þenna boekling saman settan, at eige falle mer
með aollo or minne þat es ek heyrða af þesso mále segja enn fróða
mann Gizoer Hallz son, ok enn nockora menn aðra merkelega, hafa í
frásaogor foert.10

Þat berr ok annat til þessa rits: at teygja til þess unga menn at
kynnasc várt mál, at ráða þat es á Norroeno er ritið, laog, eða saogor,
eðr mann-froeðe.

3. Set-ek af því heldr þetta á skraó an annan fróðleik, þann es áðr
es á skrár settr, at mer sýnesc mínom baornom eðr aoðrom ung-mennom
[1344]15 vesa í skyldasta lage at vita framazt, með hverjom hætte at
her hefer magnasc Cristnen, eðr byscops-stólar setter vereð á Íslande;
ok vita síðan hverer merkis-menn byscoparner hafa veret, es her hafa
vereð, ok ek ætla nú frá at segja.

4. En þat skylder mik til at ríta, hverso staðrenn hefer eflsc ok20
[[59: 1]] magnasc í Scála-holte, eðr um þeirra manna ráð es hann hafa
varð-veittan, es [1345] ek hefe með Goðs miskunn alla gæfo af þeim
hloteð þessa heims.

5. En mik varer, at vitrom maonnom mon þyckja boeklingr þesse
iafn-glíkr sem horn-spánar-emne [1346], af þvi at þat er ó-fimlegazt
meðan5 van-goert es, en þá es all-fagrt es telgt [1347] es.

6. En þeir menn es svá henda gaman at þessom boeklinge, mego þat af
nýta [1348], at skemta ser við ok þeim aoðrom es lítilátlega vilja
til hlýða, heldr an hætta til hvat annat legsc fyrer þá, es áðr þycker
dauflegt; þvi at margr hefer þess raun, ef10 hann leitar ser skammrar
skemtanar, at þar koemr epter á laong áhyggja.

7. Synesc mer þat ráð, at sá hafe af þessom fróðleik es ritenn
[1349] es hvatki es [1350] bazt gegner, ok hann hender svá gaman at;
ok varð-veite þat efter á es siaolfom mon í geð falla, en felle þat
niðr es15 hónom fellr eige í skap.

8. En þeim sýnesc mer þat bazt sama, ef [1351] boeta vilja um þat,
es áðr þycker ómerkelega sagt vesa, ok þeir vito annat sannara, heldr
an þeir foere af [1352] þetta, eðr hafe at spotte, en vile eige eðr
hafe eige faong á um at boeta.20

9. En því hefe-ek iafnat þesso til horn-spánarens [1353], at mer
sýnesc forkunnar-emne í vesa: en ek veit, at miok þarf um at [[60:
2.]] fegra; ok skal mer þar annt um vesa [1354], meðan ek em til foerr,
um at boeta.

10. Verð-ek ok af því skyldogr til, at þat mun af mínom vaol­dom ok
van-roekð ef þat es nockot í þesso mále sem rangt reynesc þat es riteð
es; en eige þeirra manna es ek þyckjomc þenna fróðleik5 efter hafa.

11. En þat es forn orðz-kviðr, at 'Hús skal hiónom fá:' sege-ek af
því fyrst hverso boerenn hefer bygsc í Scála-holte; en síðan frá þeim
es staðenn hafa varð-veittan.



1. 1. Ketilbiorn enn Gamle bió at [1355] Mosfelle, ok átte mart10
barna. Teitr hét sonr Ketilbiarnar; hann vas sá gæfo-maðr, at hann
bygðe þann boe fyrstr es í Scála-holte heiter, es nú es all-gaofgastr
boer á aollo Íslande. Sví vas aonnor gæfa hans, at hann átte at
syne Gizoer enn Hvíta, es með Cristne kom til Íslannz, ok bió í
Scála-holte efter Teit faoðor sínn. Gizoerr enn Hvíte átte15 þriár
konor: fyrst átte hann Halldóro, dóttor Hrólfs or Geitlande [1356];
þeirra dótter vas Vilborg, es átte Hialte Skeggja son [1357]: Gizoerr
átte síðan Eyverska kono, es Þórdís hét, ok vas þeirra son Ketill,
es átte Þórhaollo Skafta dóttor. Gizorr átte síðan Þórdíse, dóttor
Þóroddz Goða á Hialla í Olfuse; ok aótto þau mart barna.20

2. Þeirra son vas Ísleifr; hónom fylgðe Gizoerr útan, ok selde hann
til læringar abbadíse einne í borg þeirre es Herfurða heiter. [[61:
2.]] Isleifr kom svá til Íslannz at hann vas prestr ok vel lærðr. Hann
kvángaðesc, ok feck Daollo Þórvallz dóttor or Áse: þau gaóto þriá
sono: Gizoerr hét son þeirra es síðan vas byscop; annarr hét Teitr
es bió í Hauka-dale; þriðe hét Þórvaldr, es bió í Hraun-gerðe, mikell
haofðinge. Gizoerr Hvíte lét goera ena fyrsto kirkjo í Scála-holte,5
ok vas þar grafenn at þeirre kirkjo; en Ísleifr bió í Scála-holte
efter faoðor sínn.

3. Ísleifr vas vænn maðr at álite, ok vin-sæll við alþýðo, ok alla æve
réttlátr ok ráðvandr, giaofoll ok góð-giarn, en aldri auðegr. En es
Ísleifr vas fimm-toegr at aldre, ok Ísland hafðe eige fiarre [1358]
þvi10 at lengð vereð cristið, þá vas hann beðenn til útan-ferðar,
ok valðr til byscops of allre alþýðo á Íslande. Síðan fór hann útan
ok suðr til Saxlannz, ok sótte heim Heinrek keisara Conraðs son, ok
gaf hónom hvíta-biaorn, es komenn vas af Groenalande [1359]; ok vas
þat dýr en mesta goerseme; en keisarenn feck Ísleife bréf sítt með
innsigle15 um allt velde sítt. Síðan fór hann til fundar við Leonem
papa. En pávenn sende bréf sítt Adalberto erki-byscope í Brimom [1360],
at hann skylde gefa Ísleife byscops-vígslo á Hvít-dróttens-dag; ok
kvezc pávenn þess vilja vænta með Goðs miskunn, at þá moende lang-æst
[1361] tign vesa at þeim byscops-dóme, ef enn fyrste byscop være20
vígðr til byscops á þeim dege, es Goð prýdde alla veraold í gift
Heilags Anda: ok vas Ísleifr vígðr til byscops á þeim dege at boðe
páva, af Adalberto erki-byscope í Brimom xiiij [1362] nóttom fyrer
[[62: 2.]] Columba-messo, ok feck erki-byscop hónom alla þá reiðo es
hann þurfte at hafa með byscops-tign, efter því sem pávenn sende orð
til ok keisarenn.

4. Síðan fór Ísleifr byscop þat sama sumar til Íslannz, ok sette
byscops-stól sínn í Scála-holte. Hann hafðe nauð mikla á marga5 vega
í sínom byscops-dóme, fyr sakar ó-hlýðne manna. Má þat af því merkja
nockot í hverjom nauðom hann hefer veret fyr sakar ó-trú ok ó-hlýðne,
ok ó-siða [1363] sínna under-manna, at Log(saogo) maðrenn átte moeðgor
tvær; ok þá laogðosc sumer menn út í víking, ok á her-skip; ok maorg
endeme tóko menn þau [1364] til10 aonnor, es nú moende ó-doeme þyckja,
ef menn hende slíkt.

5. Um daga Ísleifs byscops kómo út byscopar af aoðrom laondom,
ok buðo mart linara an Ísleifr byscop: urðo þeir því vin-sæler við
vánda menn; þar til es Adalbertus erki-byscop sende bréf til Íslannz,
ok bannaðe maonnom alla þiónosto af þeim at15 þiggja; ok kvað þá suma
vesa bann-setta; en alla í ó-leyfe síno faret hafa.

6. Um daga Ísleifs byscops kom út sá (byscop) es Kolr hét, ok andaðesc
hann her. Hann vas grafenn í Scála-holte; ok vas sú kirkja her á lande
fyrst prýdd í tigens mannz grefte, es at rétto20 kallasc andleg móðer
allra annarra vígðra húsa á Íslande.

7. Ísleifr byscop hafðe ofallt ó-hoegt bú fyre penninga; vóro faong
lítel, en at-sókn mikel; ok vas af því ervitt búet.


[[63: 2.]]

7. b. Marger menn seldo hónom sono sína til læringar, ok vóro þeir
síðan góder kenne-menn; en tveir urðo byscopar, Kolr í Vík austr í
Norege, ok Ioan [1365] byscop at Hólom.


8. En es Ísleifr hafðe byscop vereð xxiiij vettr, þá tók hann sótt
á Alþinge [1366] um messo, svá skiótt, at hann varð þegar at foera
[1367] or5 messo-klæðonom; ok fór þá í messo-klæðen Gothormr prestr
Finnolfs son or Laugar-dale at ráðe byscops; ok tók þar til messonnar
es byscop hvarf frá, ok lauk messonne. Síðan vas byscop foerðr heim
í Scála-holt, ok vas goert rúm hans í kirkjo. Menn leitoðo þá efter
heilræðom við hann, bæðe um byscops10 kosning ok þá hlute aðra, es
þeim þótte at skyldo þurfa um at tala. En hann lagðe þau raóð til,
at þeir skyldo biðja Gothorm prest til útan-ferðar; ok talðe hann
bazt til fallenn af þeim maonnom es þá vóro samlender; en sagðe þó,
at þeim moende seint auðet byscops á Íslande ef þeir héte eige þvi,
at vesa við hann soemilegar,15 es síðarr koeme til, an þeir hefðe
við hann veret.

9. Enn oefra hlut æve Ísleifs byscops bar marga hlute hónom til handa,
þá es miok birte goezko hans fyr þeim maonnom es þat kunno at skynja:
af þvi at marger menn vóro þeir óðer foerðer hónom til handa, es
heiler gengo frá hans funde. Mungát blezaðe20 hann þat es skiaðac
vas í, ok vas þaðan frá vel dreckanda. Ok mart annat þesso glíkt bar
hónom til handa, þótt ek greina nú eige [[64: 3.]] svá sér hvat, sem
hann goerðe, ok enom vitrostom maonnom þótto ener mesto kraftar fylgja.

10. Ísleifr vas vígðr til byscops þá es hann vas fimm-toegr at
aldre. Þá vas Haralldr Sigurðar son konongr yfer Norege. Ísleifr
byscop andaðesc á Dróttens-dege í kirkjo at Scála-holte at miðjom5
dege, iij [1368] nóttom fyr Seljo-manna-messo. Þá hafðe hann byscop
veret xxiiij vettr, ok vas hann grafenn hiá leiðe Kols byscops. Þá
vas liðet frá Hingat-burðe Christi m lxx iij aór.

11. Þess es geteð, at byscopar kómo út hingat til Íslannz um daga
Ísleifs byscops: en Friðrekr einn kom áðr út, sá es saogor sé10 frá
goervar. En þesser hafa svá út komet, at menn hoelzt skyn á vitað:--

Ioan byscop enn Írske; ok hafa þat sumer menn fyr satt, at hann
foere síðan til Vindlannz, ok snoere þar maorgom maonnom til Goðs;
ok vas síðan tekenn ok barðr, ok hoeggnar af bæðe hendr ok foetr,15
ok haofoðet síðarzt; ok fór með þeim pínengom til Goðs.

Enn þriðe byscop kom til Íslannz Biarnharðr Vilraðs son, es kallaðr vas
enn Bókvíse, ok sumer menn segja at af Englande være, ok hafðe fylgt
Óláfe enom Helga; ok hafe síðan at hans raóðom faret til Íslannz.20

Enn fiórðe vas Rudolfr byscop, es sumer segja Ulfr héte, ok være
kynjaðr or Rúðo or Englande. Hann vas xix vetr á Íslande, ok bió á
Boe í Borgar-firðe.


[[65: 4.]]

Fimmte kom til Íslannz Heinrekr byscop ok vas tvá vetr á Íslande.

Enn sétte vas Biarnharðr byscop enn Saxnezke [1369]; ok vas með
Magnúse konunge enom Góða Óláfs syne. Hann fór síðan til Íslannz,
ok vas her xx vettr. Hann hafðe tvá bústaðe í Vatz-dale, at Gilj-aó
ok Steins-staoðom. Hann vígðe marga hlute, þá es maorg5 merke
hafa á [1370] orðet, kirkjor ok cloccor, brúar [1371] ok brunna,
vaoð ok vaotn, biaorg ok biaollor; ok þyckja þesser hluter hafa
birt sannar iartegner [1372] hans goezko. Biarnharðr vas á Íslande
meðan Haralldr konungr Sigurðar son vas í Norege, þvi at þeir vóro
eige sam-sátter. Síðan fór hann útan ok til handa Óláfe konunge
Kyrra, syne10 Harallz; ok síðan fór hann til Róms at boen konungs,
ok friðaðe fyr aondoðom. En es hann kom aftr, skipaðe konungr hann
byscop í Seljo; en síðan fór hann í Biaorgyn ok andaðesc þar; ok es
ein-mælt, at hann hafe veret enn meste merkis-maðr.

12. Á daogom Ísleifs byscops urðo maorg ok stór tíðende. Þá15 varð
í Norege fall ens Helga Óláfs konungs: þá varð ok andlát Magnúss
konungs ens Góða, sonar Óláfs konungs; ok andaðesc hann í Danmaork,
en lík hans vas foert norðr í Þróndheim til Níðar-óss.--Þeir aondoðosc
báðer áðr an Ísleifr var byscop.--En síðan (es) hann vas byscop, fell
Haralldr konungr Sigurðar son20 á Englande; ok lítlo síðarr Haralldr
Goðina son. Þá andaðesc Magnús konungr son Harallz Sigurðar sonar;
ok Sveinn Ulfs son [[66: 5.]] Dana konungr ..... [1373] ok Þórkell
Eyjolfs son; Geller Bolverks son; Þórsteinn Cugga son; Snorre Goðe,
ok aðrer mikels-háttar menn.

2. 1. GISOERR son Ísleifs byscops vas foeddr í Scála-holte; en hann
vas lærðr á Saxlande, ok vígðr til prestz5 þegar á unga aldre. En es
hann kom til Íslannz, þá kvángaðesc hann, ok feck Steinunnar Þórgríms
dóttor, ok áðr hafðe átta Þórer Brodda son, ok bioggo þau fyrst at
Hofe í Vápna-firðe.

2. Gizoerr vas mikell maðr vexte ok vel bols-vexte, biart-eygr
ok nockot opin-eygr, tígolegr í yfer-bragðe, ok allra manna
góð-giarnaztr,10 rammr at afle, ok forvitre [1374]. Gizoerr vas
al-goerr at ser um alla hlute þá es karl-maðr átte at ser at hafa:
hann vas far-maðr mikell enn fyrra hlut æve sínnar, meðan Ísleifr
lifðe, ok vas iamnan mikels virðr, hvar sem hann kom, ok vas tignom
maonnom á hende es hann vas útan-lannz. Haraldr konungr Sigurðar son15
vas þá konungr í Norege, ok mælte hann þeim orðom um [1375] Gizoer,
at hónom kvasc svá sýnasc til, at hann moende bazt til fallenn at
bera hvert tignar-nafn sem hann hlyte. Til Róms fóro þau bæðe hión,
áðr þau foere til Íslannz.

3. Gizoerr vas eige samlendr þá (es) faðer hans andaðesc, ok20 kom
hann út annat sumar fyrer Alþinge í Rangár-óse, ok vas á skipe
nockorar nætr, ok vilde eige til þings ríða, meðan engi vas til
byscops koerenn á þingeno. En haofðingjarner baóðo Gothorm prest
til útan-ferðar efter því sem þeim þótte Ísleifr byscop helzt [[67:
5.]] hafa á kveðet [1376]; ok varð þat um síðer at hann iátte því,
ef eige þoette aonnor faong vildre á vesa. En es Gizoerr spurðe þat,
at Gothormr prestr vas ráðenn til útan-ferðar, þá reið hann til
þings. En es Gizoerr kom til þings, þá geck Gothormr prestr á hlaðet
fyrer kirkjo, ok lýste því fyrer alþýðo manna, at enge kostr være
á hans5 útan-ferð, síðan Gizoerar vas við kostr. Snoere þá alþýðan
at Gizoere ok baóðo hann útan-ferðar; en hann talðesc undan á marga
vega. En þó kom þar um síðer [1377], at hann iátte at ganga under
þann vanda: en aller haofðingjar héto hónom, at halda hlýðne um aoll
Goðs boðorð, þau es hann byðe, ef hónom yrðe byscops-vígslo10 auðet.

4. Síðan fór hann útan þat (et) sama sumar. En es hann kom til
Saxlannz, þá vas allt embætte teket af Liemaro [1378] erki-byscope; fór
hann þá á fund Gregorii páva, ok sagðe hónom allan mála-vaoxt sínnar
ferðar, ok svá vandræðe þau, sem um vas at vesa á15 marga vega. En
pávenn sende þá Gizoer til handa Hardvig erki-byscope í Magada-borg á
Saxlande, ok bauð at hann skylde gefa hónom byscops-vígslo; en hann tók
við hónom með mikelle soemð ok virðingo, ok vígðe hann til byscops iiij
nóttom fyre Mário-messo ena síðare.--Hann vas þá fertoegr at aldre,--ok
feck erki-byscop20 hónom þat allt es hann þurfte bráðast til nauðsynja.

5. Efter þat fór Gizorr byscop út til Íslannz, ok tók aoll alþýða
feginsamlega við hónom. Hann tók tign ok virðing svá mikla, [[67:
6.]] þegar snemmendiss byscopsdóms síns, ok [1379] svá vilde hverr
maðr sitja ok standa sem hann bauð, ungr ok gamall, sæll ok fátoekr,
konor ok karlar; ok vas rétt at segja, at hann vas bæðe konungr ok
byscop yfer landeno meðan hann lifðe.

6. Hann hafðe eige allt land í Scála-holte til ábúðar fyrst5 nockora
stund, af þvi at Dalla móðer hans vilde búa á sínom hlut lannzens
meðan hon lifðe. En es hon vas aondot, ok byscop hlaut allt land,
þá lagðe hann þat allt til kirkjo þeirrar, sem þar es í Scála-holte,
ok hann sialfr hafðe goera láteð, þrí-toega at lengð, ok vígðe Petro
[1380] Postola; ok maorg goeðe aonnor lagðe Gizoerr byscop10 til
þeirrar kirkjo, bæðe í laondom ok lausa-fé; ok kvað á síðan, at þar
skylde of-allt byscops-stóll vesa meðan Ísland es bygt ok Cristne má
haldasc. Gizoerr byscop gaf til kirkjo í Scála-holte purpura-haokol
hvítan, es þar hefer lenge síðan baztr veret; ok margar goersimar
aðrar.15

7. Þesser menn vóro sam-tíða Gizoere byscope: Sæmundr prestr í Odda,
es bæðe vas forvitre [1381], ok lærðr allra manna bazt. Annarr
Márcus Skeggja son laogsaogo-maðr, es vas enn meste spekingr ok
skálld. Þeir báro raóð til samans, ok sótto at ráðe haofðingja,
at þat yrðe laog-teket, at menn tiundaðe [1382] fé sítt á hverjom
misserom20 ok allan laog-vaoxt fiár síns, svá sem í aoðrom laondom es
títt, þar sem Cristner menn [1383] byggja. En með ráða-leytne þeirra
ok for­taolom spaklegom, urðo þau mála-lok, at menn gengo under [[68:
6.]] tiundar-gialdet, ok skylde síðan skifta í fióra staðe: einn hlut
til handa byscope; annan til kirkna; þriðia hlut skyldo hafa kennemenn;
en fiórða hlut fátoeker. Ok hefer eige annarr slíkr grund-vaollr
veret auðræða [1384] ok hoegenda í Scála-hollte sem tiundar-gialdet,
þat er til lagðesc þá fyre vinsælð ok skaorung-skap Gizoerar5 byscops.

8. Steinunn Þórgríms dótter hafðe bús-forráð í Scála-holte fyr innan
stock meðan Gizoerr byscop réð fyrer stólenom; en Dalla meðan Ísleifr
byscop lifðe.

9. En es Gizoerr byscop hafðe seteð at stólenom xx vetr,10 eða
því nær, þá felldo Norðlendingar boen at hónom, at þeir skyldo
ná at hafa byscop einn ser, ok setja þar byscops-stól annan í
Norðlendinga-fiórðunge, ok gefa til þess fiórðung byscopsdóms síns
[1385] allan at aftektom, ok taolðo þess vaón at annat-hvárt munde ván
vesa [1386], at sialdan eðr aldri munde vera byscops-laust í landeno15
ef tveir være byscops-stólarner. Ok þá boen veitte Gizoerr byscop með
Goðe Norðlendingom; ok vas síðan valðr til byscops af Goðe ok góðom
maonnom Ioan prestr Ogmundar son; ok hann fór útan með bréfom Gizoerar
byscops, ok sótte síðan á fund Paschalis páva; ok vas hann vígðr til
byscops af Ozoere erki-byscope í20 Lunde í Skáneyjo ij nóttom fyrer
Philippi messo ok Iacobi. Ioan [[69: 7.]] fór síðan til Íslannz,
ok sette byscops-stólenn at Hólom í Hialta-dale í Eyja-firðe.


10. Gizoerr hafðe telja látið boendr á Íslande, þá es þingfarar-kaupe
átto at gegna; ok vóro þá .vij.c. í Austfirðinga-fiórðunge: en
x.c. í Sunnlendinga-fiórðunge; ix. c. í Vestfirðinga-fiórðunge; en í
Norðlendinga-fiórðunge xii.c., ok vas sá auðgastr5 at iofno mann-tale.


11. En es Gizoerr byscop vas orðenn half-áttroeðr, þá tók hann þyngð
svá mikla, at hann rétte [1387] eige or reckjo, ok hann vas eige
þing-foerr. Hann sende þá orð vinom sínom, ok aollom haofðingjom
til Alþingess, at menn skyldo biðja Þorlák prest Rúnolfs-son til10
útan-ferðar: en hann talðesc undan, bæðe fyrer oesko sakar ok margra
annarra hluta. En þó lauk svá því mále, at hann iátte at ganga under
þann vanda, ef þat være byscops ráð. Síðan lét Gizoerr byscop búa
ferð hans, unz hann vas at aollo vel búenn, ok feck hónom bréf sítt
á fund Ozoerar erki-byscops.15

12. En sótt elnaðe á hendr Gizoere byscope ok goerðesc haorð, straong
ok ó-hoeg; ok fello stór saór á haorund hans allt at beine [1388],
ok fylgðo stór ó-hoegende af verkjom. En es miok tók at hónom at
soekja, ok menn þóttosc heyra at beinen gnaotroðo við hroer-ingarnar,
þá geck Steinunn húsfreyja at sæingenne, ok spurðe20 hverso þá skylde
mætte mannz komet vesa, es heita skal fyrer manne. En byscop svarar:
'Þvi at eins skal heita á Goð, at aukesc of-allt mín ó-hoegende,
ef til þess es heiteð, meðan ek má standasc; þvi at enge efne ero
á því,' seger hann, 'at biðjasc [[70: 8.]] undan Goðs bardaga; es
nálega mon komet á enda æve mínnar; en genget áðr mart at sólo.' Hann
vas ok þá at spurðr hvar hann vilde láta grafa sik; en hann svaraðe
með viðr-komningo [1389], ok miklo lítelæte: 'Grafeð ér mik hverge
í nánder faoðor mínom, þvi at ek em þess eige verðr, at hvíla hónom
nær.' Síðan skipaðe5 hann til allra hluta [1390], efter því sem hann
vilde at være, áðr an hann andaðesc.

13. Syner hans aondoðosc aller fyrr an hann, nema Baoðvarr: Gróa,
dótter hans, lifðe efter hann, ok vas gift Katle Þórsteins syne.10

14. Gizoerr vas vígðr til byscops þá es hann vas fer-toegr at aldre. Þá
vas Óláfr konungr Kyrre at Norege, son Harallz Sigurðar sonar. Gizoerr
byscop andaðesc þriðja dag vico xii nóttom fyrer Columba-messo. Þá
hafðe hann veret byscop xxxvi vetr. Hann vas grafenn hiá faoðor
sínom. Þá vas liðet frá Hingat-burðe Christi15 xi.c. ok xi aór.

15. Svá fell maorgom manne nær andlát Gizoerar byscops, at aldri geck
or hug meðan þeir lifðo. En þat kom ásamt með aollom maonnom, at hans
þóttosc aldri ið-giaold fá. Þat hefer ok vereð allra vitra manna mál,
at hann hafe af Goðs gift [1391] ok siálfs20 síns atgoerve gaofgastr
maðr veret á Íslande bæðe lærðra manna ok ó-lærðra.

16. Á því áre es Gizoerr byscop andaðesc, þá andaðesc, ok Paschalis
Papa, [[71: 9.]] ok Baldvine Iórsala konungr; Arnhallr Patriarche í
Iorsala-borg; Alexius Girkja [1392] konungr; Philippus Fracka konungr.

17. Þá goerðesc ok óveðrátta mikel: þá vas sú hríð um Dimbildaga,
at kennimenn mátto eige veita tíðer at [1393] kirkjom fyr norðan land
Fosto-dag enn Langa, ok hóf upp knorr under Eyja-fiollom, ok snoere á
lofte [1394], ok kom hvolfande niðr; ok5 lítill hlute manna mátte taka
Corpus Domini á Páska-dagenn; en sumer urðo úte dauðer [1395]. Onno
hríð kom þá es menn riðo til Alþingis, ok drap fé manna fyr norðan
land. Þá braut ok kirkjo á Þingvelle, þá es Haralldr konungr Sigurðar
son hafðe við til fenget. Þat sumar kom til Íslannz xxxv skipa, en
viii kómo(sc) til Noregs um hausteð efter Michaelis-messo. Við þat
óx svá mikell mann-fiolðe á10 Íslande, at þat vas mikell ó-árans-auke
í morgom heroðom.


18. Svá hugðesc at enom vitroztom maonnom, at svá þótte drúpa [1396]
Ísland efter frá-fall Gizoerar byscops, sem Róma-borgar-ríke efter
(frá)-fall Gregori Páva. En frá-fall Gizoerar byscops bende til ættar
[1397] um aoll ó-hoegende á Íslande af ó-áran, bæðe í skipa-brotom
ok15 mann-tióne, ok fiár-skaða es því fylgðe; en efter þat ó-friðr
ok laogleysor; ok á þat ofan mann-dauðr [1398] sá um allt landet, at
einge hafðe slíkr orðet, síðan (es) landet vas bygt. Tveimr vetrom
efter lát Gizoerar byscops varð Hafliðe Márs son sárr á Alþinge;
ok varð eige um málet doemt þat sumar.20

19. Baoðvarr einn lifðe sona [1399] Gizoerar byscops þá es hann
andaðesc; en áðr aondoðosc aðrer syner hans. Teitr, Ásgeirr, Þórðr ok
Ioan. Groa lifðe ok lenge síðan, ok varð nunna, ok andaðesc á daogom
Kloengs byscops.

20. Í byscops-dóme Gizoerar byscops urðo maorg stór-tíðende:--Lát25
ens Helga Knútz konungs á Fióne, ok Benedicts bróðor hans; Vilhialma
tveggia Engla kononga [1400]; andlát Óláfs konungs Kyrra, [[72:
10.]] ok Hákonar Magnús sonar í Norege; fall Magnús konungs Berbeins
vestr á Írlande á Ulaztire; foersla ens helga Nicholai byscops í
Bár; andlát Óláfs konungs Magnús sonar í Norege; líflát Magnús iarls
ens helga: andlát laogsaogo-manna, Márcúss, ok Ulf­heðins; ok Teitz
Ísleifs sonar, ok annarra sona Ísleifs byscops;5 ellz upp-kváma í Heklo
(fialle), ok maorg aonnor stór-tíðende, þó (at) her sé eige skrifoð.

3. 1. Þorlákr Runolfs son,--Þórleiks [1401] sonar, Þórarens sonar,
Þórkels sonar Skota-kollz; ok sonr Hallfríðar, Snorra dóttor,
Carlsefnis sonar--vas foeddr upp með faoðor sínom10 í barnoesko; en
hann vas lærðr í Hauka-dale. Hann vas snemmendis skynsamr ok siðlátr,
ok hog-þeckr kverjom góðom manne. Hann vas bóknæmis-maðr [1402]
mikell þegar á unga aldre, ok skiótr í skilningom: hann vas lagðr
til kenne-mann-skapar. Léttr vas hann ok lítelátr ok ó-afskiftasamr;
heil-ráðr ok heil-hogaðr við15 alla þá es hiá hónom vóro; miúklátr
ok miskunsamr við þá es þess þurfto við; frænd-roekenn ok forsiáll
í flestom hlutom, bæðe fyre sína haond ok annarra. Þorlákr hafðe þá
tvá vetr ens fiórða tigar, es hánn vas til byscops koerenn; ok má
af því marka hverr maðr hann vas, es sá [1403] maðr kaus hann til
ens mesta vanda, es20 vitraztr ok gaofgaztr vas, en hónom [1404]
kunnaztr, es vas Gizoerr byscop.

[[73: 11.]]

2. Þorlákr vas meðal-maðr vexte, lang-leitr ok liós-iarpr á hár;
þocka-góðr; en kallaðr ecke vænn maðr af alþýðonne, né all-skaorogr at
á-varpe vel-flestra manna. En es hann kom útan-lannz, vas þá [1405] svá
á teket, at líteð munde mann-val vesa á landeno, ok þeim sýndesc hann
ó-sendelegr til slíkrar tignar. En hann svaraðe5 sialfr, at eige koeme
þat til þess; ok kvað þat mest valda, at hann hafðe [1406] meirr leynt
ann-maorkom fyr maonnom an Goðe; ok af þessom svaorom þóttosc menn
vita, at hann moende vel til fallenn vesa slíkrar tignar. En es hann
kom á fund Ozoerar erki-byscops, þá sá hann brátt hverr Þorlákr vas,
ok tók við hónom með soemð10 ok virðingo; en hafðe í nockora tregðo um
vígslo hans; ok talðesc eige kunna at setja haofoð á haofoð ofan. En
þó, at orðsendingo Gizoerar byscops, þá hét hann hónom vígslonne,
ok vilde eige til þess staðar vígja, es áðr vas annarr byscop at;
ok bað hann kiósa ser stað at hann være til vígðr: en leyfðe þó,
at hann være í Scála-holte,15 ef Gizoerr byscop leyfðe hónom þat,
ef hann være á lífe es Þorlákr byscop koeme út.

3. Þorlákr vas vígðr til byscops iij nóttom fyrer Philippi
messo ok Iacobi, ok vas hann vígðr til staðar í Reykja-holte í
Borgar-firðe. Hann vas vígðr í Danmaork xxx daogom [1407] fyrr an
Gizoerr20 byscop andaðesc í Scála-holte.

4. Þorlákr byscop fór til Íslannz þat sama sumar sem hann vas vígðr,
ok tóko menn feginsamlega við hónom sem verðogt vas. [[73: 11.]] Hann
helt eno sama lítelæte í byscopsdóme sínom sem hann hafðe áðr haft;
ok alla lét hann sína mann-koste í vaoxt fara, en oenga þverra meðan
hann lifðe. Hann tók marga menn til læringar, ok urðo þeir síðan
góðer kenne-menn; ok í maorgo eflðe hann Cristnena á Íslande.5

5. Þá es Þorlákr byscop hafðe þriá vetr seteð at stóle í Scála-holte,
þá andaðesc Ioan byscop Ogmundar son at Hólom. En síðan vas koerenn í
staðenn Ketill Þórsteins son; ok fór hann útan ok suðr til Danmerkr,
ok vas þar vígðr til byscops x nóttom efter [1408] Cyndil-messo ok
kom til Íslannz et sama sumar efter.10

6. Þorlákr byscop rudde til þess á sínom daogom, at þá vas settr
ok ritinn [1409] Cristinna-Laga-þaóttr, efter enna vitrozto manna
for-siaó á landeno, ok umbraóðom Ozorar erki-byscops; ok vóro þeir
báðer við stadder til forráða Þorlákr byscop ok Ketell byscop;
ok mart vas þat annat es þeir setto ok saomðo á sínom daogom til15
sið-bótar lannz-maonnom.

7. Þorlákr byscop bauð barn-fóstr Halle Teitz syne í Hauka-dale; ok
fór þá Gizoerr, son Hallz, í Scála-holt; ok vas byscop við hann svá
ástúðlegr, sem hann være hans son; ok spáðe hann þat es síðarr geck
efter, at slíkr merkes-maðr munde trautt finnasc á20 Íslande sem hann;
ok varð á því raun síðan.

8. Þorláke byscope þiónaðe enn same prestr of-allt, meðan hann lifðe,
ok hann vas byscop, es Tiorve hét, ok vas Baoðvars­son [1410], [[74:
12.]] mikell dýrðar-maðr; ok hann hafðe áðr veret með Gizoere byscope;
ok mátte af slíko siá, ok aoðrom hans daglegom haóttom prýðelegom,
hverso iamn-lyndr hann vas at góðo í síno lífe.

9. Hann soeng hvern dag þriðiung af Psaltera seint ok skynsamlega; en
þess á miðli kende hann eðr ritaðe, eðr las yfer helgar5 ritningar,
eðr læknaðe [1411] raóð þeirra manna, es þess þurfto ok á hans
fund kvómo: aldrí vas hann iðjo-lauss. Orr vas hann við aumingja;
en kallaðr [1412] fé-fastr við alþýðo; ok sparðe þó alldrigi penninga
at nauðsynjom til allra þarfligra hluta.

10. En es Þorlák byscop skorte þriá vetr á fimm-toegan at aldre;10 þá
tók hann sótt efter Iól [1413], ok lá í svefn-húse því es hann vas
vanr at sofa í ok lærðer menn hans. En (es) sótten tók at vaxa, þá
bað hann lesa yfer ser bóc þá es heiter Cura Pastoralis--þá bók hefer
goerva Gregorius Páve, ok sagt frá greinelega hverso þeim manne skal
faret vesa at aollo, es stiórnar-maðr skal vesa annarra15 manna. En
þat þóttosc menn á finna, at hann hugðe síðan betr til síns and-látz,
an áðr [1414] bócen være lesen. Hann biósc síðan við and-láte síno
.... [1415] sem hann kaus sialfr; ok eige visse almúgenn hvat framm
fór í sóttenne allt til and-látz.

11. Þorlákr vas vígðr til byscops á daogom Gelasi páva, þá20
hafðe hann þriá vetr ens fiórða tigar. Hann andaðesc næsta dag fyre
Brigiðar-messo [1416],--þá hafðe hann byscop vereð xv vetr,--ok [[75:
12.]] vas grafenn hiá enom fyrrom byscopom. Þá vóro konungar í Norege,
Eysteinn ok Sigurðr Iórsala-fare. Þá vas liðet frá Hingat-burð Christi
M. C. vetra ok xxvi vetr.

12. Sá atburðr varð fyr norðan land enn [1417] sama dag es Þorlákr
byscop andaðesc, at á enne saomo stundo fór leiðar sínnar prestr5
einn fróðr ok gaofogr, es Árne hét, sonr Biarnar Cearleifs [1418]
sonar; hann heyrðe soeng fagran upp í himenenn yfer sik, ok vas sungen
Cantilena Lambertus byscops þesse:


    Sic animam claris coelorum reddidit astris;


en þat vas vitað, þá (es) til vas prófat, at einge maðr hafðe þar10 í
naónd veret. Þótte af því maorgom maonnom mikels vert um þenna atburð;
ok léto ser eige or minne falla.

Martees merkilegt ok goeskosamlegt at segja frá Þorláke byscope
Rúnolfs syne.

13. Þau tíðende urðo í hans byscopsdóme:--at [1419] þá andaðesc15
Ioan byscop enn Helge at Hólom; ok Eysteinn konungr, ok Sigurðr
Iorsala-fare: Sæmundr prestr enn Fróðe andaðesc þat vár et sama
es Þorlákr byscop andaðesc áðr um vetrenn. Þá vas ok víg Þórsteins
Hallvarz sonar, ok Þóress Símunar sonar [1420]: þá andaðesc Bergþórr
Laogsaogo-maðr. Þá vas laog-deila þeirra Hafliða Márs20 sonar ok
Þórgils Odda sonar: þá vas ok sætt þeirra.

14. Marger haofðingjar vóro Þorláke byscope ó-hoeger fyr sakar [[76:
13.]] sínnar ó-hlýðne; en sumer í ó-ráðvende ok laga-brotom; en hann
hafðe allt í haondom sem bazt vóro efne á.

4. 1. Magnús vas sonr Einars, Magnús sonar, Þórsteins sonar, Hallz
sonar af Síðo; ok Þóríðar, Gils dóttor, Hafrs sonar, Svertings sonar
[1421], Hafr-Biarnar sonar, Molda-Gnúps5 sonar--Magnús vas upp foeddr
með Einare faoðor sínom, ok Odd­nýjo stiúp-móðor sínne, dóttor Magnúss
prestz, Þórðar sonar, or Reykja-holte. Þessom kvaóðosc þau mest unnt
[1422] hafa af aollom sínom baornom. Magnús vas til boekr settr,
ok vígðr aollom vígs­lom áðr hann vas prestr.10

2. Magnús vas vænn maðr at álite, ok heldr hárr maðr vexte, fast-eygr
ok vel limaðr; þýðr ok þeckelegr, ok allra manna skaoroligaztr í
aollo yfir-bragðe ok lát-goeðe. Hann vas liúfr ok lítelátr við alla;
stór-lyndr, ok stað-fastr í skape; fullræðasamr, frænd-roekenn;
marg-fróðr ok mál-sniallr. Hann reyndesc ok15 vel brugðenn við
hvárt-tveggja, búnað ok farar; ok vas of-allt alla menn sættande,
hvarge es [1423] hann vas við maól manna staddr; ok sparðe þess ecke,
hvárke orð sín né auðoefe.

3. En þá es Þorlákr byscop hafðe andasc áðr um vetrenn, þá vas Magnús
koerenn til byscops sumaret efter; ok þat sumar20 ætlaðe hann til
útan-ferðar, ok varð aftr-reka í Blaondo-ós [1424], ok vas þá í
Scála-holte um vetrenn, ok fór til Noregs annat sumar efter. [[76:
13.]] Þat sumar fór hann útan es þeir Magnús Sigurðar son ok Haraldr
Gille baorðosc á Fyri-leif, ok stoeck þá Haraldr undan suðr til
Danmerkr. Magnús byscops-emne fór til Danmerkr et sama haust ok gaf
giafar Harallde konunge; ok tóksc þá vin-fenge þeirra miket. Magnús
fór á fund Ozorar erki-byscops, ok tók hann við hónom5 virðolega, ok
vígðe hann til byscops á Simonis messo-dag. Þann vetr enn næsta var
Magnús byscop í Sarps-borg, þar til es Haralldr konungr varð ílendr
[1425]; þá fór hann til hans, ok tók konungr feginsamlega við hónom,
ok með enne mesto soemð ok virðingo; ok vas með hónom þar til (es)
hann fór út aftr til Íslannz, ok þá af10 konunge virðolegar giafar;
borð-ker, es vá átta merkr, ok vas þar síðarr caleier or goerr;
ok morgar giafar aðrar; þvi at konungr vas aorr ok stór-lyndr við
vine sína.

4. Magnús byscop kom til Íslannz um Alþinge, ok kom í Eyja-fiaorð,
ok reið til þings; ok kom þar þá (es) menn vóro at dómom,15 ok urðo
eige á-sátter um eitt-hvert mál. En þá kom maðr at dómenom ok sagðe,
at nú riðe Magnús byscop á þinget. En menn urðo svá fegner þeirre
saogo, at þegar gengo aller menn heim. En byscop geck síðan á hlaðet
fyrer kirkjo, ok sagðe þá aollom maonnom þau tíðende en goerzc haofðo
í Norege meðan20 hann vas útan; ok þótte aollom maonnom mikels um
vert mál-snille hans ok skaorungskap.

5. Þá reyndesc ok brátt hverr ágætes-maðr hann vas í síno stór-lynde
[[77: 14.]] ok for-siaó, bæðe fyrer sína haond ok annarra; af því at
hann sparðe alldrige fiár-hlut til meðan hann vas byscop, at sætta þá
sem áðr vóro sundr-þycker; ok lagðe þat iamnan af síno til es þeirra
vas í [1426] miðle; ok urðo af því engar deilðer með maonnom meðan hann
vas byscop. Hann hélt eno saomo lítilæte við alþýðo5 sem áðr, þó (at)
hann være byscop, ok vas hann af því vinsælle an flester menn aðrer;
ok hafðe þar marga stóra hlute til þess goert.

6. Magnús byscop lét miok auka kirkjo í Scála-holte, ok vígðe síðan;
ok vas kirkjo-dagr settr á Seljo-manna-messo; en áðr10 hafðe veret
Cross-messa á vár, þá es Gizoerr byscop hafðe vígt. Magnús byscop
lét tialda kirkjo borða þeim es hann hafðe út haft, ok vóro þat enar
mesto goersemar. Hann hafðe ok út pell þat, es haokull sá es or goerr
[1427] es Skarmendingr heiter.

7. Hann eflde ok miok staðenn í maorgom til-laogom, þeim es15 lenge
hafa mest goeðe at veret, bæðe staðnom ok svá þeim sem hann hafa
síðan varð-veittan. Hann keypte til staðarens í Scála-holte Ár-nes ok
Sandár-tungo [1428], ok nær allar Vestmanna-eyjar áðr an hann andaðesc,
ok ætlaðe þar at setja munk-lífe; en hónom endesc eige til þess líf.20

8. En þá es Ketill byscop vas nú orðenn vel siau-toegr, þá fór hann
til Alþingess, ok fól sik under boena-hald allra lærðra manna [[78:
15.]] á presta-stefno; ok þá bauð Magnús byscop hónom með ser heim
í Scála-holt til kirkjo-dags síns, ok brullaups þess, es þá [1429]
skylde vesa. Sú veizla vas svá miok vaondot, at slíks [1430] ero sízt
doeme til á Íslande: þar vas mikell miaoðr blandenn, ok aoll atfaong
[1431] aonnor sem baozt mátte verða. En Faostodags aftan fóro byscopar
báðer5 til laugar í Laugar-ás efter naóttorð [1432]: en þar urðo þau
tíðende, at þar andaðesc Ketill byscop; ok þótto maonnom þat mikel
tíðende. Mikell hryggleike vas þar á maorgom maonnom í því heim-boðe,
þar til es byscop vas grafenn ok um hann búet. En með fortaolom Magnús
byscops, ok dryck þeim enom ágæta es þar vas veittr, þá10 urðo menn
skiótar af-hoga haormom sínom.

9. En efter þat vas koerenn [1433] til byscops at Hólom Biaorn
Gils son; ok fór hann útan með bréfom Magnús byscops til Áskels
erki-byscops; ok vas Biaorn vígðr til byscops næsta dag efter [1434]
Cross-messo á vár; ok fór út hingat et sama sumar, ok vas byscop at15
Hólom xv vetr.

10. En þá (es) fimtán vetr vóro liðner frá andláte Þorláks byscops
Rúnolfs sonar, en Magnús hafðe byscop veret xiiij vetr, þá barsc
[1435] sú ó-hamingja at Íslande, at eige hefer aonnor þvílík veret at
mann-skaða:--þá es Magnús byscop hafðe faret yfer Vest­fiaorðo,20
ok vas í Hitar-dale um Michaelis-messo. En enn næsta dag efter
messo-dagenn þá kom þar eldr í boeenn um nátt-maól; [[79: 15.]] ok
varð byscop eige fyrr varr við, an  [1436] hónom þótte eige óhætt
út at ganga: ok vas sem hann vilde eige bráðan [1437] goera at flýja
ógn dauðans, es hann sá þá nálgasc; en hafa þess áðr beðet iamnan
Almátkan Goð, at hann skylde þat líf-lát spara hónom til handa, es
hónom þoette ser í því sýn laugar-píning [1438]. Magnús byscop lét
þar5 sítt líf í hús-bruna ok með hónom tveir menn ok lxx [1439]. Þar
andaðesc Tiorve prestr Baoðvars son, es ofallt hafðe hónom þiónat í
hans byscopsdóme: þar létosc siau prestar aðrer, ok aller gaofger.

Lík byscops ok Tiorva voro nálega óbrunnen, ok vóro bæðe10 foerð
í Scála-holt. Ok þá vóro sender skynsamer menn í Fliótz-hlíð, Páll
prestr Solva son or Reykja-holte ok Goðmundr Coðrans son, at segja
þesse tíðende Halle Teitz syne, ok Eyjolfe Sæmundar syne, ok aoðrom
haofðingjom es at veizlo vóro með hónom. Þeir fóro þegar [1440]
í Scála-holt; en vestan kómo [1441] með lík byscops ok15 Tiorva,
Goðmundr prestr Brannz son, ok Snorre Svertings son, ok fleire
virðoleger menn; ok kómo í Scála-holt á Dionysius-messo: en Gereonis
dag vóro líken niðr sett hiá grefte enna fyrre byscopa. Ok hefer vætr
[1442] meirr til ó-ynðis hagat an þá es menn urðo svá nauð-skilja,
at nálega varð hverr við sínn ást-vin at skilja20 í Hitar-dale.

11. Magnús vas vígðr til byscops af Ozoere erki-byscope á daogom
[[80: 16, 17.]] Anacleti páva; á daogom Harallz konungs Gilla ok
Magnus Sigurðar sonar Noregs kononga.--Þá vas hann vetre meirr an
half-fertoegr. En hann andaðesc í hús-bruna í Hitar-dale fimta dag
vico, einne nótt efter Michaelis-messo. Þá vas liðet frá Hingat-burðe
Christi mc vetra xl ok einn vetr. Þá hafðe hann xiiij vetr5 vereð
byscop.

12. Meðan Magnús vas byscop, þá sviko boejar-menn Haralld Gilla; ok þá
féllo þeir Magnús konungr Sigurðar son ok Sigurðr Slembe-diácn. Þá varð
víg Þóriss Steinmóðs sonar; ok andlát Ozoerar erki-byscops; ok Hrafns
Ulfheðins [1443] sonar laogsaogo-mannz,10 ok Finnz log(saogo)mannz;
ok Heinrecs Engla-konungs [1444]: ok mart annat varð á hans daogom
þat es mikel tíðende vóro í.

5. 1. Efter andlát Magnús byscops, et næsta sumar, varð at kiósa
mann til byscops; ok fór útan Hallr Teitz son .... [1445] ok mælte
all-staðar þeirra mále, sem hann være ofallt [1446]15 þar barn-foeddr
sem þá kom hann. Hallr andaðesc í Trekt, þá es þeir fóro aftr, ok vas
eige vígðr til byscops. En þá es andlát hans spurðesc til Íslannz,
ok menn mundo þurfa at kiósa byscop, þá vóro þat allra manna koer
sem ráða aótto, með for-sió Biarnar byscops á Hólom, at menn koero
til byscops Norðlenzkan mann þann es20 Kloengr hét, ok vas Þórsteins
son ok Halldóro Eyjolfs dóttor.

2. Kloengr vas vænn maðr at álite, ok meðal-maðr at vexte, [[81:
17.]] kviklegr ok skaorolegr, al-goerr at ser, ok ritare góðr; ok enn
meste lærdóms-maðr. Hann vas mál-sniallr ok oer-uggr at vin-feste;
ok et mesta skáld. Hann hafðe veret með Katle byscope, ok hafðe hann
í maorgo lage hans haótto góða.

3. Kloengr fór útan et sama sumar sem hann vas til byscops5 koerenn
[1447] með bréfom Biarnar byscops á fund Áskels erki-byscops; ok
vígðe hann Kloeng til byscops xii nóttom efter Mário-messo á vár;
ok et sama sumar efter fór hann til Íslannz. Ok vas þá komenn frá Róm
sunnan ok allt útan or Bár, Gizoerr Hallz son, ok fór út með hónom;
ok aótto þá menn at fagna tveimr senn10 enom baoztom mann-goersemom á
Íslande. Á tveim skipom kómo út stór-viðer þeir es Kloengr byscop let
hoeggva í Norege til kirkjo þeirrar, es hann lét goera í Scála-holte,
es at aollo vas vaondoð framm yfer hvert hús annat, þeirra es á
Íslande vóro goer, bæðe at viðom ok smíð [1448].15

4. En es byscop kom til stólsens í Scála-holte, þá varð hann þegar
svá vin-sæll við alþýðo, at iam-vel unno hónom þeir menn hug-aóstom,
es hann hafðe skamma stund at stóle seteð, es heldr haofðo við hónom
horft í sínom huga. Es þat eige kynlegt, þó at svá yrðe, þvi at hann
vas stór-lyndr ok stór-giaofoll við vine sína,20 en aorr ok olmoso-góðr
við fátoekja menn. Linr ok lítilátr vas hann við alla; kátr vas hann ok
keske-fimr, ok iamn-lyndr maðr [[81: 18.]] við vine sína .... [1449]
svá at þar vas til allra or-lausna at siá es hann vas, meðan [1450]
hann vas at stólnom, hverskyns es við þurfte.

5. Hann lét taka til kirkjo-smíðar es hann hafðe einn vetr at stólnom
seteð. Svá sýndesc aoðrom maonnom tillaog vesa mikel til kirkjo-goerðar
at hverjom misserom, bæðe í viðar-faongom ok5 smiða-kaupom, ok
mann-haofnom þeim es þar fylgðo, at svá þótte skynsaomom maonnom,
sem aoll lausa-fé þyrfte til at leggja, þau es til staðarens
laógo í tiundom ok aoðrom tillaogom. Búet þurfte í annan stað svá
mikella tillaga við at hverjom misserom, fyrer sakar folks-fiolða ok
gest-risne ok annarrar at-vinno, (at) svá þótte10 sem þar moende þurfa
til alla lausa aura þá es staðr átte. Í þriðjo grein hafðe hann svá
veizlor fiolmennar, ok stórar fé-giafar við vine sína, es bæðe vóro
marger ok gaofger, at þar þurfte nálega oer-grynne [1451] fiár til
at leggja. En Almáttegr Goð, es allt gótt gefr af ser, lét oengan
þann hlut skorta [1452] es þurfte at hafa bæðe til kirkjo-gerðar15
ok annarrar at-vinno, þeirrar es byscop vilde láta hafa meðan hann
lifðe. Þesser vóro haofoð-smiðar at kirkjonne í Scála-holte:--Árne,
es kallaðr vas haofoð-smiðr, ok Biaorn enn Hage Þórvallz son; Illoge
Leifs son telgðe ok viðo. En þá (es) kirkjan vas algoer, orte Rúnolfr
byscops son víso þessa:20


    Hraust er haoll sú er Criste hug-blíðom lét smíða
    (góð es rót und raóðom) ríkr stiórnare (slíkom):
    [[82: 18.]] gifta varð [1453] þat es goerðe Goðs rann Igul-tanne;
    Petr hefer eignasc ítra Arna smíð ok Biarnar.


6. Kloengr byscop vas svá mikell mála-fylgis-maðr, ef hann [1454]
vas at sóttr til ásiá með þvi at hann vas bæðe haofðinge mikell ok
saker vizko ok mál-snille: hónom vóro ok lannz-laogen í kunnara5 lage:
af því haofðo þeir haofðingjar allan hlut mála, es byscop vas í fylge
með; vas ok enge sú goerð um stór-maól, at eige være Kloengr byscop
til hverrar tekenn. Þeir vóro ok hans viner traus­tazter es mest vóro
virðer á Íslande, Ioan Loptz son ok Gizoerr Hallz son. Kloengr byscop
átte ok giafa-víxl við ena stoersto10 haofðingja í aoðrom laondom
þeim es í naónd vóro; ok af slíkom hlutom varð hann vin-sæll, bæðe
útan lannz ok innan.

7. En þá es kirkja vas goer í Scála-holte, svá (at) byscope þótte
hon til vígslo fallen, þá goerðe byscop veizlo mikla ok ágæta
vinom sínom; ok bauð þangat Birne byscope ok Nicholasi ábóta, ok15
maorgom haofðingjom; ok vas þar enn meste fiolðe boðs-manna. Þeir
vígðo báðer kirkjo í Scála-holte, Kloengr ok Biaorn; annarr útan,
en annarr innan; ok helgaðo báðer Petro [1455] postola, svá sem
áðr hafðe veret; en Nicholaus ábóte hafðe formæle.--Þat vas á dege
Viti píningar-váttz. En efter tíðer bauð Kloengr byscop20 aollom
þeim maonnom es við kirkjo-vígslo haofðo veret, at hafa þar daogorð
[1456], þeim es ser þótte þat betr gegna; ok vas þat enn goert [[83:
18.]] meirr af stór-mennzko an fullre forsiaó; af því at á einn veg
reynesc [1457] þat ofallt at eiga under maorgom heimskom, es einn vitr
maðr má vel fyrer siá með stillingo; ok mátte þar ok þá mikit at raun
um þat komasc; fyrer þvi at eige haofðo þar fære menn daogorð [1458]
an siau hundroð, ok urðo tillaog með ó-hoegendom áðr5 létte. En veizla
vas all-virðoleg, at aollom þeim maonnom (þótte) es þangat vas boðet;
ok vóro aller virðinga-menn með stórom giaofom á braut leyster.

8. Kloengr byscop lét prýða [1459], þat mest hann mátte til fá, kirkjo
þá es hann let goera at Scála-holte, unz hon vas at aollo búen. Hann10
lét goera goll-caleic, ok setja gim-steinom, ok gaf kirkjonne. Hann
lét ok ríta tíða-boecr miklo betre an áðr vóro. Sú vas aoll iðja hans
senn, at kenna prestlingom, ok ritaðe ok soeng psaltara, ok mælte þó
allt es nauð bar til. Meinlátsamare [1460] vas hann í maorgo lage an
aðrer byscopar haofðo veret, í vaokom ok faostom ok klæða-búnaðe.15
Hann geck opt ber-faóttr um nætr í snióvom ok frostom.

9. Þá es Kloengr hafðe tio vetr byscop veret, þá andaðesc Biaorn byscop
at Hólom tveim nóttom efter Lucas-messo, þá es hann hafðe fimmtán vetr
byscop veret. En um sumaret efter vas koerenn Brandr prestr Sæmundar
son; ok hafðe hann útan með ser bréf20 Kloengs byscops á fund Eysteins
erki-byscops, ok vas hann vígðr til byscops Mário-messo-dag enn síðara,
ok vas í Biaorgvin um [[84: 19.]] vetrenn ok svá Ioan Loptz son; en
síðan fór byscop út um sumaret efter, ok settesc á byscops-stólenn at
[1461] Hólom sem hann vas til vígðr.

10. Kloengr byscop helt allt til elle vegsemð sínne ok vin-sælðom,
svá at aller virðo hann mikels, þeir es mest vóro verðer.5 En es hann
tók at eldasc, þá sótte at hónom van-heilsa mikel, ok tóko [1462] í
fyrsto foetr hans at opnasc af kulða ok meinlætom ok ó-hoe­gendom þeim
es hann hafðe haft. En es hann tók at moeða bæðe elle ok van-heilsa,
þá sende hann útan bréf sín til Eysteins erki-byscops, ok bað hann
leyfiss, at hann mætte ná af hende at selja10 land ok fiol-skylder
[1463] byscopsdóms síns, ok at taka annan til byscops í staðenn efter
doemom Gizoerar byscops. En þau orð kómo aftr af erki-byscope, at í
hans leyfe skylde byscop kiósa ok senda útan; en hann skylde halda
upp tíða-goerð ok kenningo meðan hann være til foerr, þótt hann være
eige foerr til yfir-ferðar.15

11. Kloengr byscop fór til Alþingess, ok sótte þá at haofðingja, at
maðr være til byscops koerenn [1464]; ok vas þat allra manna ráð, at
hann skylde kiósa þann sem hann vilde. En hann kaus Þorlák Þórhallz son
es þá vas ábóte í Þykkva-boe. Ok vas þat mikel gæfa Kloengs byscops,
es hann kaus þann mann efter sik, es nú es sann-heilagr;20 ok aller
mego vita, at aldri hefer fyrr meirr ne einn maðr at því reynzc á
Íslande, nema enn heilage Þorlákr byscop, es þá [[85: 20.]] vas til
byscops koerenn [1465]. En þó hafðe Kloengr byscop staðar-forraóð
þau missere; ok vas þó ó-hoegt fyrer at ráða; þvi at þá laógo oengar
giafer til staðarens; en afvinna varð oengo minne. Kloengr byscop
selde sialfr af hende staðarens forraóð; ok feck þau í hendr Þorláke
byscope, ok þeim maonnom es hann koere til með5 sér. En en síðosto
missere es Kloengr byscop lifðe, reis hann nálega ecke or reckjo;
ok biósc efter því við andláte síno, sem hverr vitr maðr moende ser
hellzt kiósa í laongom van-mætte.

12. Kloengr vas vígðr til byscops á daogom Eugenii páva af Áskatle
[1466] erki-byscope, ok á daogom Eysteins ok Sigurðar Noregs10
konunga. Þá hafðe hann siau [1467] vetr ens fimta tigar, ok vas byscop
xxiiij vetr. Hann andaðesc þrimr [1468] nóttom efter Mathias-messo--ok
berr svá ár-tíð hans; en fiórom ef hlaup-ár es eige [1469]--þá vas
Þváttdagr í Imbro-dogom um Langa-faosto. Þá vas liðet frá Hin­gað-burð
Christi at almennilego ára-tale mc lx ok ix aór; ok15 vas hann grafenn
hiá enom fyrrom byscopom. En Þorlákr ábóte stóð yfer hónom, bæðe hans
grefte ok hans andláte; ok bar hónom allz-kostar [1470] giftosamlega
til, es slíkr maðr skylde yfer hónom standa lífs ok aondoðom, sem nú
reynesc [1471] fyrer Goðe enn sæle Þorlákr byscop.20

13. Maorg urðo stór tíðende meðan Kloengr vas byscop, þótt her
gete eige margra--þá varð frá-fall þeirra broeðra Gilla-sona [[85:
21.]] Noregs konunga, Sigurðar fyrst, en þá Eysteins, en síðast
Inga: ok andlát Ióans erki-byscops; ok fall Hákonar Herðe-breiðs; ok
andlát Biarnar byscops á Hólom. Á daogom Kloengs byscops vas píndr
enn heilage Thomas erki-byscop á [1472] Englande. Ok á hans daogom
kom annat sinn upp eldr í Heklo-felle; þá vas ok iarð-skialfte5 sá,
es mann-skaðe varð af. Þesser menn aondoðosc Íslenzker meðan Kloengr
vas byscop--Ioan Sigmundar son [1473], ok Hreinn ábáte [1474], Póll
Þórðar son, ok Goðmundr Ketils son; Biarn-heðinn prestr Sigurðar son,
ok Beiner bróðer hans. Víg Helga Skafta sonar; ok Nicholas Sigurðar
son vas þá felldr í10 Þrónd­heime.

14. Nú má oss sýnasc sem eige hafe slíkr skaorungr veret fýr margra
hluta sakar á Íslande sem Kloengr byscop vas; viljom ver þat ok ætla,
at hans rausn mone uppe meðan Ísland es bygt.


[Epilogue.]

Nú es komet at frá-saogo þeirre sem segja skal frá enom sæla15
Þorláke byscope; ok es þesse saga her samið [1475] til skemtanar
góðom maonnom; ok til fróðleiks [1476], sem aðrar þær es her 'ro fyrr
ritnar [1477]. En svá vel sem frá-saogn ferr frá hverjom þeirra,
þá ero þó enge doeme fegre í alla staðe an frá þessom enom dýrlega
Goðs vin es at segja, Þorláke byscope; es at rétto má segjasc geisle
eðr gim-steinn20 heilagra, bæðe á þesso lande, ok svá annars-staðar
um [[89: 1.]] heimenn. Hann má at saonno kallasc postole Íslannz,
svá sem enn heilage Patrekr kallaðesc postole Írlannz; þvi at þeir
fraomðo verk postola sialfra í sínom kenningom ok þolin-moeðe, bæðe
við ó-hlýðna menn ok rangláta.







Here beginneth Hunger-waker.

1. This little book I call Hunger-waker inasmuch as it appears to many
uninformed men, wise though they be, that have gone through it, that
they would wish to know much more thoroughly the rise and the life
of those notable men of whom little is told forth in this scroll,
though I have cast together into my book well-nigh all that I have
fast in my memory.

2. I have put together this little book in order that there might not
altogether fall out of my memory what I heard that man of knowledge,
Gizor Hallsson, say on the matter thereof, and what certain other
notable men have set forth in narrative.

This also in the second place hath led me to write this, that it
might draw young men on to make themselves acquainted with our speech
[letters] and to read what is written in the northern tongue, Law or
Histories or Biographies.

3. I have rather set this matter down in a scroll, than such other kind
of knowledge as hath been already set in scrolls, because methinks
that it is for my children or other young men in the highest degree
right to know, first and foremost, how and in what way Christendom
hath grown to strength here, and how the bishops' sees were set in
Iceland; and, secondly, to know what notable men the bishops that
have been here have been, of whom I am purposed to speak.

4. Moreover this reason also enforceth me to write how the see hath
grown and waxed strong in Scal-holt, and of the conversation of those
men that have had it in their keeping--to wit, that I have by the
grace of God gotten from them all my furtherance in this world.

5. And I am aware that to wise men this little book will seem most like
unto the stuff out of which a horn-spoon is wrought, for that is most
ungainly while it is yet a-making, but very fair when it is carved.

6. But they that seek amusement from this little book may profitably
use it for their own entertainment and that of such others as are
willing cautiously to hearken thereto, rather than jeopard themselves
in other pastimes to while away dull hours. For many a man hath proved
this, that if he will seek him short-lived pleasure there must needs
follow thereafter long penance.

7. Methinks it is good that a man shall pick out of this goodly matter
that is here written, whatsoever he liketh best and whatsoever yieldeth
him pleasure, and let him lay up in his mind that which falleth in
with his mind, but drop that which doth not fall in with his fashion
of thought.

8. And methinks that for such it is better that they should mend
that which they think to be told poorly here, and which they know
somewhat more thoroughly, rather than that they should cry it down
or turn it into mockery, and yet be neither willing nor able to mend
it for themselves.

9. And for this cause also I have likened this to a horn-spoon,
because methinks there is much good stuff therein, but I know that
there is much need that it be beautified or fair wrought, and I shall
as long as I am able busy myself to the mending thereof.

10. I also am the more bound to do this, because it is my fault and my
lack of care if, in the matter that is here written, there be anything
which shall turn out to be wrong, and not the fault of those men of
whom I have said that I have drawn my knowledge thereof.

11. And inasmuch as there is an old saw, that it is the house that
holds the man, I will speak first of how the house was settled at
Scal-holt, and afterwards of them that have been the keepers of
the see.

1. 1. Cetil-beorn the Old dwelt at Moss-fell, and had many
children. Tait was the name of a son of Cetil-beorn. He was so
fortunate that he first set up the homestead that is called Scal-holt,
which is now the noblest house in all Iceland. This was his second
piece of good fortune, that he had for a son Gizor the White, who came
with Christendom to Iceland, and dwelt in Scal-holt after his father
Tait. Gizor the White had three wives. First he had to wife Hall-dora,
daughter of Hrod-wolf o' Goatland; their daughter was Wil-borg, whom
Sholto Scegge's son had to wife. Then Gizor had to wife a woman from
the islands [Western Islands], whose name was Thor-dis, and their son
was Cetil, who had to wife Thor-katla, Skapte's daughter. Then Gizor
had to wife Thor-dis the daughter of Thor-ord the gode o' Hiall in
Aulfus, and they had many children.

2. Their son was Is-laf. Gizor took him abroad, and put him as a
disciple with an abbess in a town that is called Her-forth. When Is-laf
came back to Iceland he was a priest and well learned. He married
and took to wife Dolla, the daughter of Thor-wald o' Ridge. They got
three sons. Gizor was the name of one, who afterwards was bishop;
the second was named Tait, who dwelt in Hawk-dale; the third was
named Thor-wald, who dwelt at Hrawn-garth, a great chief. Gizor the
White had the first church set up in Scal-holt, and was buried there
at that church. But Is-laf dwelt at Scal-holt after his father.

3. Is-laf was a fair man to look on, and well beloved of all men, and
all his life upright and honest, generous and benevolent, but never a
wealthy man. But when Is-laf was fifty years old (and Iceland had not
been christened any longer than that), then he was bidden to go abroad,
and chosen as bishop by the whole commonweal in Iceland. Then he went
abroad and southward to Saxland, and went to see the emperor, Henry
Conradsson, and gave him a white bear that had come from Greenland,
and this beast was the greatest treasure, and the emperor gave Is-laf
his writ with his seal to go over all his dominions. Then he went to
see pope Leo. And the pope sent his writ to Adalbert, archbishop of
Bremen, that he should give Is-laf the consecration of a bishop on
Whit-Sunday, and the pope said that he was in hope that by God's grace
this bishopric should be a long-enduring office if the first bishop
were consecrated to Iceland on the day in which God blessed the whole
world with the gift of the Holy Ghost. And Is-laf was consecrated
bishop on that day, according to the pope's command, by Adalbertus,
archbishop in Bremen, fourteen nights before Columba's mass-day
[26th May, 1056]. And the archbishop gave him all the insignia that
he needed to have with the office of bishop, according as the pope
and the emperor had sent him word.

4. After this bishop Is-laf came the same summer to Iceland, and set
up his bishop's see at Scal-holt. He had much trouble in many ways
in his bishopric because of the disobedience of men. And it may be
somewhat of a token of what need he hath been in by reason of the lack
of faith, and the disobedience, and evil conversation of those under
him, that the Law-speaker had to wife mother and daughter. And in
those days some men lay at sea on wicking cruises and in war ships,
and many betook themselves to many other abominations which would
now be thought shocking if men were to commit them.

5. In the days of bishop Is-laf there came hither bishops from other
lands and gave easier commands than bishop Is-laf, wherefore they
found favour with evil men, until archbishop Adalbert sent his writ
out to Iceland and forbade men to receive any service at their hands,
and saying that some of them were excommunicated, and that all had
come without his leave.

6. In the days of bishop Is-laf there came to Iceland a bishop whose
name was Col, and he died here. He was buried at Scal-holt. Now this
church was the first here in this country that was honoured by the
burial of a man of rank, the church which by right may be called the
ghostly mother of all other consecrated houses in Iceland.

7. Bishop Is-laf kept all through a straitened household as regards
money. The revenue was little, but the calls upon it were many,
and thereby the household was strained.

7. b. Many men sent him their sons (see Libellus 9. 1).

8. But when Is-laf had been bishop four-and-twenty winters he was
taken ill at the All-moot, at mass, so quickly and suddenly that
he was forced to put off his mass-vestments at once, and then priest
Guth-thorm, Fin-wolf's son of Bath-dale, by the order of the bishop put
on the mass-vestments and went on with the mass where the bishop left
off, and ended the mass. Then the bishop was brought home to Scal-holt,
and a room prepared for him in the church. And there men were seeking
him for counsel, both as to the choice of a bishop and as to other
things which they thought it was needful to speak about. And he gave
them this counsel, that they should ask Guth-thorm the priest to go
abroad [to be hallowed bishop], saying that he was the best fitted
of all them that were then in the country; nevertheless he said that
they would be long getting a bishop in Iceland, unless they promised
to behave in more seemly wise to him who should succeed him than they
had done to himself.

9. In the latter part of the life of bishop Is-laf there appeared many
things about him which very clearly showed forth his goodness before
the face of those men who knew how to look at them, insomuch that many
mad folk were brought to his hand that went away whole after they had
seen him. He blessed drink that darnel had got into, and it was good
to drink afterwards; and many another such thing happened about him,
although I do not now tell over one by one all things that he did,
and which seemed to the wisest men to show that he must have the
greatest power in working miracles.

10. Is-laf was consecrated bishop when he was fifty years old. Harold
Sigurdsson was then king over Norway. Bishop Is-laf died on the
Lord's-day in the church at Scal-holt at midday, [three] nights before
the Sel-men's-mass [5th July]. He had then been bishop four-and-twenty
winters, and he was buried by the tomb of bishop Col. There was then
passed from the birth of Christ 1073 years [July 5, 1080].

11. It is told that bishops came out hither to Iceland in the days
of bishop Is-laf, but Frederick was the only one that came out before
of whom stories were made. But these are those who have come here of
whom men have taken most account:--

Bishop John the Irishman; and some men hold for true that he afterwards
went to Wendland and that there he turned many to God, and at last
he was taken and flogged, and both his hands and feet cut off, and
last of all his head, and in such torment he departed to God.

The third bishop that came to Iceland was Beorn-hard Wilradsson, who
was called the Book-wise, and such men say that he was from England,
and that he had followed St. Olaf, and had afterwards by his counsel
journeyed to Iceland.

The fourth bishop was Rud-olf, whom some say was called Wolf, and
he was by kin of Ruda [Rouen] in England [Normandy]. He was nineteen
winters in Iceland, and dwelt at By in Borg-frith.

Fifth came to Iceland bishop Henry, and he was two winters in Iceland.

The sixth was bishop Bearn-hard the Saxlander, and he was with
king Magnus the Good, the son of Olaf. Afterwards he journeyed
to Iceland, and was here twenty winters. He had two households in
Water-dale--Gill-water and Stan-stead. He hallowed many things which
bear many marks thereof, church and bells, causeways and brooks,
fords and rivers, rocks and small hills, and all those things are
held to have shown forth true proofs of his goodness. Bearn-hard
was in Iceland while king Harold Sigurdsson was in Norway, inasmuch
as they were not at one. Afterwards he went out of the country,
and took service with king Olaf the Peaceful, the son of Harold,
and afterwards he went to Rome at the prayer of the king, and made
peace for the dead. And when he came back the king made him bishop
of Selia, and afterwards he went to Beorg-win [Bergen], and there he
died, and it is said by all that he was a man of the greatest note.

12. In the days of bishop Is-laf there were many and great
tidings. There was in Norway the fall of king St. Olaf; then came
about also the death of king Magnus the Good, the son of king Olaf,
and he died in Denmark, but his body was brought north into Thrond-ham
to Nith's-mouth [Nidaros]. Both these died ere Is-laf was bishop;
but after he was bishop king Harold Sigurdsson fell in England, and a
little later Harold Godwinesson. There died king Magnus, son of Harold
Sigurdsson, and Swain Wolfsson, king of the Danes ..... [in Iceland
there died .....], and Thor-kell Eywolfsson, Gelle Baul-werksson,
Thor-stan Cogsson, Snorre the gode, and men of great account.



2. 1. Gizor, the son of bishop Is-laf, was born in Scal-holt, but he
was taught in Saxland [Saxony], and was hallowed priest straightway
in his youth. But when he came out to Iceland he married and took to
wife Stan-wen Thor-grim's daughter, whom Thore Brorde's son had to
wife before, and they kept house first at Temple in Weapon-frith.

2. Gizor was a big man of stature and portly, bright-eyed and somewhat
open-eyed, of noble presence, and the most kindly of men; strong
of body, and a wise man. Gizor was finished in all those qualities
which a man ought to possess. He was a great traveller the early part
of his life as long as Is-laf was alive, and was always held worthy
wherever he went, and he served men of rank while he was abroad. King
Harold Sigurdsson was then king of Norway, and he spoke these words
of Gizor, saying that he could see that he was very well suited to
bear any rank he might get. He and his wife went to Rome before they
came back to Iceland.

3. Gizor was not in the country when his father died, but he came
out here the second summer before the All-moot to Rang-water-mouth,
and was on board some nights, for he would not ride to the Moot as
long as none had been chosen bishop at the Moot. The chiefs asked
Guth-thorm the priest to go abroad [to be hallowed bishop], according
as they thought bishop Is-laf had specially directed, and at last
he consented, if there were thought to be no better choice. But when
Gizor heard that priest Guth-thorm was appointed to go abroad, then
he went to the Moot. But when Gizor came to the Moot, then priest
Guth-thorm walked forth to the parvis before the church and declared
to the whole commonalty that there was no question of his going out
[for consecration] now that they could choose Gizor. Then all the
commonalty turned to Gizor and prayed him to go abroad, but he excused
himself in many ways; nevertheless it came about at the last that
he consented to undertake this difficult charge, and all the chiefs
promised to pay obedience to all God's ordinances [the canon law]
that he should order if he were hallowed bishop.

4. Then he went abroad that same summer. But when he came to Saxland
archbishop Liemarus had been deprived of all his power. Therefore he
went to see pope Gregory [VII], and told him all that happened before
and during his journey, and also the difficulties by which he was in
many ways beset. But the pope sent Gizor to Hard-wig, archbishop of
Magdeburg in Saxland, and bade him to give him the consecration of
a bishop, and he received him with great honour and worshipfully,
and hallowed him bishop four nights before the latter Mary-mass or
Lady-day [Sept. 4, 1082]. He was then forty years of age, and the
archbishop gave him all that he lacked for his present needs.

5. After this bishop Gizor came out to Iceland, and the whole
commonalty received him gladly. He received such rank and honour
immediately at the outset of his bishopdom that every man would sit
or stand as he bade, young or old, rich or poor, women or men, and
it is true to say that he was both king and bishop over the land as
long as he lived.

6. He had not all the land at Scal-holt for his farm at first for
some while, because his mother Dalla wished to keep up a household on
her share of it as long as she lived. But when she was dead and the
bishop came into the whole land, then he bestowed it all upon the
church that is in Scal-holt, which he himself had had built thirty
[fathoms] long and hallowed to Peter the Apostle. And with much
other wealth did Gizor endow this church both in lands and money,
and he said moreover that there should always be a bishop's see
while Iceland was inhabited and Christendom lasted. Bishop Gizor
gave to the church in Scal-holt a white purple-hackle [mass-cope],
which has long been the best there, and many other treasures.

7. These men were of the same time as bishop Gizor: Sæ-mund the priest
o' Orde, who was the best both of wise men and clerks; secondly,
Marcus Scegge's son, the law-speaker, who was the greatest sage and
poet. They took counsel together and brought this counsel before
the chiefs, that it should be made law that men should give tithes
of their stock every season, and of all the legal increase of their
stock, as was the custom in other lands where Christian men dwell. And
from their consultation and wise persuasive speeches the end of the
matter was that men took upon themselves the payment of tithe, and the
tithe was to be dealt into four shares--one for the bishop, another
for the church, a third share the clerks should have, and a fourth
share the poor. And there hath been no such foundation in Scal-holt
for wealth and profit as this tithe-tax, which was laid on by reason
of the popularity and power of bishop Gizor. [See Libellus 10. 3.]

8. Stan-wen Thor-grim's daughter kept the household in Scal-holt
indoors while bishop Gizor ruled the see, and Dalla while bishop
Is-laf lived.

9. But when bishop Gizor had been established in his see for twenty
winters or near that time, the North-land-men made petition to him that
they might have a bishop of their own, and set up a second bishop's
see in the North-land-men's Quarter, and that he should endow the
same with the fourth of the whole revenues of his diocese, and that
there should be two bishop sees in the land; and they said that they
hoped that this once done there would be every hope they would seldom
or never be bishopless in the land if there were two bishop sees
there. And this petition bishop Gizor granted for God's sake to the
North-land-men, and afterwards there was chosen to bishop, by God and
good men, priest John Og-mund's son. And he went abroad with a writ of
bishop Gizor's, and afterwards went to see pope Paschalis, and he was
hallowed bishop by Auzur, archbishop of Lund in Sconey [April 29],
two nights before Philip-and-James-mass. Then John went to Iceland
and set up his bishop's see at Holar in Sholto-dale in Shaw-frith.

10. [See Libellus 10. 6.]

11. But when bishop Gizor was half-eighty [75] years old, so great
heaviness came upon him that he did not rise from his bed and could not
go to the Moot. Then he sent word to his friends and all the chiefs at
the All-moot that men should pray priest Thor-lac the son of Run-olf
to go abroad [to be hallowed bishop]. But he excused himself both by
reason of his youth and for many other causes. Nevertheless the end
of the matter was that he consented to undertake the burden if it were
the bishop's will. Then bishop Gizor had him equipped for his journey,
and gave him his writ to archbishop Auzur.

12. But his sickness increased upon bishop Gizor, and became hard,
strong and painful, and there came great sores upon his flesh down
to the bone, and there was great pain from his disease. But when the
sickness began to overcome him, and men thought they could hear his
bones rattle when he was moved, then goodwife Stan-wen went to his
bed and asked him how low should a man's strength become when there
should be vows made for him? But the bishop answered, 'For this only
should ye make vows to God, that my pain should go on ever increasing,
if a vow be made at all, as long as I am able to bear it; for it is not
permitted that a man should have himself prayed out of God's battle;
and now my life must be well-nigh at its end, and ever up to now things
have gone sun-ward [happily] with me.' He was also asked then where
he would have himself buried, but he answered with compunction and
great lowliness, 'By no means bury me near my father, for I am not
worthy to rest near him.' Then he set all things in order according
as he would have them to be before he died.

13. His sons were all dead before him, save Bead-were only. Groa,
his daughter, lived after him; she was given in marriage to Cetil
Thor-stan's son.

14. Gizor was hallowed bishop when he was forty years old, when Olaf
the Peaceful was king in Norway, the son of Harold Sigurdsson. Bishop
Gizor died the third day of the week, twelve nights before Columba-mass
[May 28]. He had then been bishop thirty-six winters. He was buried
by his father. There were then passed from the birth of Christ eleven
hundred and eleven winters [1118].

15. The death of bishop Gizor touched many men so deeply that it never
went out of their mind as long as they lived. And all men were agreed
on this, that they believed they would never get his peer, and it was
the verdict of all wise men that he hath been by God's grace and by
his own good parts the noblest man that hath ever been in Iceland,
whether of clerks or laymen.

16. [See Libellus 10. 12.]

17. [See Mantissa 1. 1, p. 267.]

18. And it was the belief of the wisest men that it looked as if
Iceland was drooping after the death of bishop Gizor, as the realm
of the city of Rome did after the fall of pope Gregory [the Great],
and the loss of bishop Gizor betokened [or pointed to the quarter of]
all kind of distress in Iceland from bad seasons, both in wrecking
of ships and loss of life and damage to stock that accompanied it,
and after that in civil war and breaking of the laws, and upon the
top of that such a mortality over all the land that there hath never
been such since the land was dwelt in. Two winters after the loss
of bishop Gizor, Haf-lide Mar's son was wounded at the All-moot,
and the case was not judged that summer.

19. Bead-were alone of the sons of bishop Gizor was alive when he
died, but there died before him his other sons, Tait, As-geir, Thord,
and John. Groa lived also long after, and became a nun, and died at
Scal-holt in the days of bishop Clong.

20. In the bishopdom of bishop Gizor there were many great
tidings:--The loss of the holy king Cnut at Fion [Fünen] and of
Benedict his brother, of the two Williams kings of England, the death
of king Olaf the Peaceful, and Hacon Magnusson in Norway, the fall of
Magnus Bare-leg west in Ireland in Ulaztir [Ulster], the translation
of Saint Nicholas bishop of Bari, the death of king Olaf Magnusson
in Norway, the passion of Saint Magnus the earl, the death of the
law-speakers Marcus [and] Ulf-hedin, and of Tait Is-laf's son, and the
other sons of bishop Is-laf, the coming up of fire [eruption] in Hecla,
and many other great tidings, though they be not written down here.



3. 1. Thor-lac, the son of Run-olf, the son of Thor-lac, the son of
Thor-arin, the son of Thor-kel Coll o' Scots, and the son of Hall-frid,
daughter of Snorre, the son of Carls-efne, was brought up with his
father in his childhood, but he was schooled at Hawk-dale. He was
early of good understanding and manners, and in favour with all good
men. He was greatly given to books even in his youth, and quick of
understanding, and disposed to clerkship. He was gentle and lowly, and
no meddler, of wholesome counsel, and whole-hearted towards all men
that were with him, meek-mannered and merciful with all that needed
it, fond of his kindred, and full of foresight in all matters, both
those which concerned himself and others. Thor-lac was two winters
of the fourth ten [32] when he was chosen bishop, and therein it may
be noted what a man he was, since he chose him for the greatest of
charges who was the wisest and noblest and best acquainted with him,
that is bishop Gizor.

2. Thor-lac was a man of middle height, long of face, and light-brown
of hair, nice looking, but not called a fair man by the generality of
folk, nor of great presence according to most men's reckoning. And when
he came abroad it was thought that there could be no great choice of
men in the country, for he seemed to them not the man to be presented
to such an office. But he answered himself that it was not that, and
he said that the real reason was that he had rather concealed his
faults before man than before God; and by this answer men thought
they could perceive that he was well suited to such an office. And
when he came to see archbishop Auzur he soon saw what manner of man
Thor-lac was, and received him honourably and worshipfully, but yet he
made some difficulty about his consecration, and said that he could
not put head upon head; nevertheless at the message of bishop Gizor
he promised him consecration, but he would not consecrate him to the
see wherein there was already another bishop, and he bade him choose
him another see, that he might be consecrated, but yet he gave him
leave that he should be in Scal-holt if bishop Gizor gave him leave
if he were alive when bishop Thor-lac came back.

3. Thor-lac was hallowed bishop three nights before
Philip-and-James-mass [April 28], and he was hallowed to the see
of Reek-holt in Borg-frith. He was hallowed in Denmark thirty days
before bishop Gizor died at Scal-holt.

4. Bishop Thor-lac went to Iceland the same summer that he was
hallowed, and men received him gladly as was his due. He kept the
same lowliness in his bishopdom as he had had before, and he let all
his qualities wax and none wane as long as he lived. He took many men
as his disciples or scholars, and they afterwards became good clerks,
and in many ways he strengthened Christendom in Iceland.

5. When bishop Thor-lac had sat three winters in the see at Scal-holt,
there died bishop John Agmund's son at Holar [1121], but afterwards
there was chosen in his place Cetil Thor-stan's son, and he went
abroad southward to Denmark, and was hallowed bishop there ten nights
after Candle-mass [Feb. 12, 1122], and came out to Iceland the same
summer afterwards.

6. Bishop Thor-lac brought things so far in his days that the Christian
Law Section was established, and written according to the provision
of the wisest men in the country and by the advice of archbishop
Auzur, and they were both stood by to the furtherance thereof,
bishop Thor-lac and bishop Cetil. And many another thing was there
which they established and put together, or ordained in their days
for the reform of the people of this country.

7. Bishop Thor-lac offered Hall Tait's son of Hawk-dale to foster
one of his sons, and therefore Gizor Hall's son came to Scal-holt,
and the bishop was so loving to him as he was to his own sons, and
foretold what afterwards came to pass, that there should scarcely
be found such a man of note in Iceland as he would be, and this was
proved afterwards.

8. The same priest served Thor-lac always as long as he lived and was
bishop, whose name was Tiorve the son of Bead-were, a man of great
goodness, and who had been before with bishop Gizor, and by this and
by his other daily noble manners how even-minded he was to good in
his life.

9. He used to sing every day a third part of the psalms slowly and
clearly, and between times he used to teach or write or read over
the holy scriptures, or give healing counsel to those that needed it
and came to him. He was never idle. He was bountiful to the helpless,
but was called close-fisted by the commonalty, though he never spared
money in needful cases for anything that required it.

10. But when bishop Thor-lac was three years short of fifty years of
age [47], he took an illness after Yule, and lay in the dormitory
where he and his clerks were wont to sleep. And when this illness
began to increase he bade them read to him the book that is called
Cura Pastoralis, which Gregory the pope wrote, and wherein is told
minutely how he shall order his way withal who shall be a governor of
other men. And men thought they could see that he was in better heart
respecting his own death after than he had been before the book was
read to him. Then he made ready against his death [only such men having
entrance to his sick chamber] as he himself chose, but the common
people did not know at all how his sickness went on till his death.

11. Thor-lac was hallowed bishop in the days of pope Gelasius. He
was then three winters of the fourth ten [33]. He died [Jan. 31] the
eve of St. Bridget's-mass. He had then been bishop fifteen winters,
and he was buried beside the former bishops. Ey-stan and Sigurd the
Jerusalem Journeyer were then kings in Norway. There was then passed
from the birth of Christ eleven hundred and twenty-six winters [1133].

12. This circumstance took place in the north of the land the same
day that bishop Thor-lac died, that at that very hour a learned and
noble priest, whose name was Arne, the son of Beorn Carleif's son or
Carls-efni's son, was going on his way, when he heard a fair song up
in the heaven over him, and there was sung this cantilena of bishop
Lambert:--


    Sic animam claris coelorum reddidit astris,


and it was found when the matter was looked into that no man had been
near there. Wherefore many men paid great heed to this circumstance,
and did not let it fall from their memory.

13. There is much notable and excellent to say of bishop Thor-lac
Runolf's son. These tidings came about in his bishopdom, that
there died Saint John bishop of Holar, and king Ey-stan and Sigurd
the Jerusalem Journeyer. Priest Sæ-mund the historian died in the
same spring [May 22, 1133], bishop Thor-lac having died the winter
before. There was also the slaying of Thor-stan Hallward's son, and
Thore Simon's son. Berg-thor the Law-speaker died then. Then was the
lawsuit between Haf-lide Mar's son and Thor-gils Ord's son. Then also
the peace between them came about.

14. Many chiefs were troublesome to bishop Thor-lac by means of their
disobedience, and some in evil life and breach of law, but he managed
everything in the best possible way.



4. 1. Magnus was the son of Einar, the son of Magnus, the son of
Thor-stan, son of Hall o' Side, and of Thor-rid, the daughter of
Gils, the son of Hafr, the son of Swerting, the son of Hafr Beorn,
the son of Molda-Gnup. Magnus was brought up with Einar, his father,
and Ord-ny, his step-mother, the daughter of priest Magnus Thord's
son of Reek-holt. They used to say that they loved him most of all
their children. Magnus was put to his books and hallowed to all the
orders before he became a priest.

2. Magnus was a fair man to look on, rather tall of stature, fair eyed,
and well limbed, cheerful and pleasant mannered, and of the finest
presence whether as regards his carriage or conversation. He was
easy and lowly to all, magnanimous and steadfast in mind, resolute,
loving to his kinsfolk, of good knowledge, and of fair speech. He
proved also well suited to either estate, farming or trading abroad;
he was above all a peace-maker wherever he was engaged in men's suits,
and to this end he spared nought--neither words nor money.

3. But when bishop Thor-lac died in the winter, the summer following
Magnus was chosen bishop, and that summer he meant to go abroad
[for his consecration], but was driven back to Blond-mouth, and was
in Scal-holt through the winter, and went to Norway the next summer
after. He went abroad the summer that Magnus Sigurd's son and Harold
Gille fought their battle at Fyri-laf, and Harold fled away south to
Denmark [1134]. Magnus the bishop-elect went that same harvest-tide
to Denmark, and gave gifts to king Harold, and there sprung up great
friendship between them. Magnus went to see archbishop Auzur, and he
received him worshipfully and hallowed him bishop on Simon's mass-day
[Oct. 28, 1174]. The next winter after bishop Magnus was in Sarps-borg,
until king Harold got into the country again; then he went to him and
the king received him gladly and with the greatest worship and honour,
and he was with him till he went back to Iceland, and he received
worshipful gifts from the king--a drinking-cup which weighed eight
marks, and there was afterwards a chalice made out of it, and many
other gifts, for the king was bountiful and generous to his friends.

4. Bishop Magnus came to Iceland about the All-moot time, and came
into Ey-frith, and rode to the Moot, and reached it while men were
at the court, and there was a disagreement about a certain case, but
with that there came a man into the court and said that bishop Magnus
was just riding into the Moot. And men were so glad to hear this,
that they all went home at once. And afterwards the bishop went out
to the parvis in front of the church, and told all men these tidings
that had come to pass in Norway whilst he was abroad, and all men
thought much of his good speaking and fine presence.

5. And it was soon proved what a noble man he was in his magnanimity
and prudence, both for himself and others, in that he never spared
any outlay as long as he was bishop to bring them to peace that were
before at odds with one another, and he would always contribute out of
his own to make up the difference between them; hence there arose no
feuds between men as long as he was bishop. He kept the same lowly
behaviour to the commonalty as before though he was bishop, and was
on this account more beloved than most other men, and he had done
great many things to deserve it.

6. Bishop Magnus had the church at Scal-holt much enlarged, and then
hallowed it, and the church day was fixed at the Selia-men's mass
[July 8], but before then it had been at Cross-mass in the spring
[May 3], when bishop Gizor had hallowed it. Bishop Magnus had the
church hung with the tapestry, or broidered hangings, which he had
brought out, and they were the greatest treasures. He also brought
over the pall or brocade out of which that hackle or cope was made,
which is called 'Scarmending.'

7. He also strengthened the see much by many endowments, which have
long been of the greatest profit both to the see and also to those who
have had it in charge. He bought, for the see in Scal-holt, Arness and
Sand-tongue and well-nigh all the West-man islands before he died,
and purposed to have set up a monastery there, but his life did not
last long enough.

8. But when bishop Cetil was now well seventy years of age, he went to
the All-moot and commended himself to the prayers of all the clerks
in the synod of priests. And then bishop Magnus asked him to come
home with him to Scal-holt to keep his church day [dedication feast]
and a bridal that was to be there. The feast was so very splendid that
it was a pattern after in Iceland; there was much mead mixed, and all
other stores of the best that might be. But the Friday evening both
bishops went to bathe at Bath-ridge after supper. And then it came to
pass that bishop Cetil died there, and men thought this great news
[July 6, 1145]. There was great grief at this feast among many of
the guests till the bishop was buried and service done for him. But
by the comforting speeches of bishop Magnus and the noble drink that
was provided, men got their sorrow the sooner out of mind than they
would otherwise have done.

9. And after that Beorn Gil's son was chosen bishop of Holar, and
he went abroad with a writ of bishop Magnus to archbishop Anscel,
and Beorn was hallowed bishop the next day after Cross-mass in spring
[May 4, 1147] and came out hither the same summer, and was bishop at
Holar fifteen winters.

10. But when fifteen winters were passed from the death of bishop
Thor-lac Runolf's son, when bishop Magnus had been bishop fourteen
winters, there befell Iceland such a calamity, as the like had never
been for loss of men, when bishop Magnus had gone over the West-firths,
and was in Hot-river-dale at Michaelmas. But the next day after,
Michaelmas-day [Sept. 30, 1148], the house caught fire at supper-time,
and the bishop was not aware of it till 'it was manifest that it
was not possible' to get out, and it was as if he would not haste
away to fly the awe of death which he could then see was upon him,
because he had always prayed Almighty God that He would give him such
a death as might manifest a cleansing passion [baptism of martyrdom]
for him. Bishop Magnus lost his life there in the burning of the house,
and with him two-and-seventy men. There died priest Tiorve Beadware's
son who had always served him as chaplain in his bishopdom. There
were seven priests more burnt, and all men of good family.

The bodies of the bishop and Tiorve were well-nigh unburnt, and
were both carried to Scal-holt, and then there were sent two men of
understanding to Fleets-lithe, priest Paul Solwi's son and Godmund
Codran's son, to tell these news to Hall Tait's son and Eyjolf Sæmund's
son and the other chiefs that were there at a feast with him. They
went forth at once to Scal-holt, but from the West there came with
the bodies of the bishop and Tiorve, priest God-mund Brand's son
and Snorre Swerting's son and many more men of worship, and reached
Scal-holt on Denis-mass [Oct. 9]. But on Jerome's-day [Oct. 10] the
bodies were buried beside the graves of the former bishops. And naught
more distressful hath ever happened than there did then in Hot-dale,
where men were so fatally parted, that well-nigh every one had to
part with a beloved friend.

11. Magnus was hallowed bishop by archbishop Auzur in the days of pope
Anacletus, in the days of king Harold Gille and Magnus Sigurd's son,
kings of Norway. He was then a winter more than half forty [36]. But
he died in the house burning in Hot-river-dale, the fifth day of the
week, one night after Michael-mass [Sept. 30]. There had then passed
from the birth of Christ eleven hundred and forty winters and one
[1148], and he had then been bishop fourteen winters.

12. While Magnus was bishop, the townsfolk betrayed Harold Gille,
and then fell king Magnus Sigurd's son and Sigurd the false deacon;
then came about the slaughter of Thore Stan-mod's son, and the death
of archbishop Auzur, and of Raven son of Ulf-hedin the law-speaker,
and of Finn the law-speaker, and of Henry king of England; and many
another thing came about in his days which was great tidings.



5. 1. After the death of bishop Magnus, the next summer they proceeded
to choose a man to bishop, and Hall Tait's son went abroad. [He
went to Rome and back again], and he spoke their speech everywhere,
as if he were a native of the place at which he was at. Hall died at
Trect [Utrecht?] as they were on their way back, and he was not yet
hallowed bishop. And when the news of his death got about in Iceland,
and men must needs choose another bishop, it was the choice of all
that had a voice, and the advice of Beorn bishop of Holar, to choose
to bishop a north-countryman, whose name was Clong, and he was the
son of Thor-stan and of Hall-dora Eyjolf's daughter.

2. Clong was a fair man to look on, and of middle stature, brisk,
and of good presence and accomplished and a good penman, and the
best of clerks. He was a good speaker, and true to his friends,
and a very good poet. He had been with bishop Cetil, and in many
particulars had his good ways of life.

3. Clong went out the same summer as he had been chosen bishop with
the writ of bishop Beorn to go to archbishop Anscel, and he hallowed
Clong bishop twelve nights after Mary-mass in spring [April 6]. The
very next summer he came out to Iceland. And there was then come from
the south from Rome and all the way from Bari Gizor Hall's son, and
he came out to Iceland with him, and so men had to welcome together
the two greatest jewels of men that were in Iceland. On board the
two ships there came out big timber, which bishop Clong had hewn in
Norway for the church which he had made in Scal-holt, and which was
in every way glorious above every other building that was built in
Iceland, both with regard to its timbers and to its workmanship.

4. And when the bishop came to the see in Scal-holt, he was straightway
so beloved by the commonalty that even those men held him most dear
when he had been a short while in the see, that had formerly been
rather set against him in their hearts. And it is natural that it
should have been so, for he was magnanimous and a generous giver to
his friends, and open-handed and an alms-giver to the poor. Lenient
and lowly to all, cheerful he was and jocular, and an even-tempered
man with his friends [a man of authority and decision], so that
he was looked to for all decisions, as long as he was in the see,
whatever kind of thing there was need of there.

5. He began his church-building when he had been one winter in
his see. It seemed to others that there was a great outlay in
church building every season, both in stores of timber and skilled
workmen's wages, and the keep of them that were employed. And men of
understanding thought that it would take up all the money revenue of
the see, both tithes and other incomes. On the other hand, there was
such great outlay needed for the household every season, by reason
of the number of people, and hospitality, and other outgoings, or
calls, that it seemed as if that would need all the revenue which
the see possessed. In the third place, he had such largely attended
feasts, and great gifts he gave his friends who were both many and
of good estate, so that there was needed for this outlay endless
money. But Almighty God, that giveth all good as He willeth, let him
fall short of naught that he needed, whether for his church building
or other calls upon him which the bishop wished to maintain as long
as he lived. These were the chief of the workmen at the church in
Scal-holt: Arne, who was called the master-workman, and Beorn the
skilful the son of Thor-wald; Illugi Leif's son also wrought on the
wood as carpenter. And when the church was quite finished Run-olf
bishop's son [bp. Cetil's son] made this verse on it:--


    Proud is the hall that the ruler raised to Christ:
    Such a plan springs from a good root.
    It was of good omen that Beorn built this house of God:
    Peter [the Patron] hath acquired the noble handiwork of Arne
    and Beorn.


        [Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 282.]


6. Bishop Clong was so great a lawyer that he was always sought to or
consulted for help in most cases, both because he was a great chief,
and by reason of his wisdom and of his power of speaking; he was
also very well versed in the Constitution: wherefore those chiefs
always had the better in their cases whose party the bishop joined,
and no great case was decided without bishop Clong being called upon
by both sides. They were also his trustiest friends that were the most
worshipful men in Iceland, John Loft's son and Gizor Hall's son. Bishop
Clong also exchanged gifts with the greatest chiefs in other lands
whom he came near to. And in such wise he became well-beloved both
abroad and in his own land.

7. And when the church was finished at Scal-holt, and the bishop
thought it fit for hallowing, he made a great feast and noble to
his friends, and bade thither bishop Brand and abbot Nicholas [of
Thwart-water], and many chiefs; and there was a very great number
of guests bidden. They both hallowed the church at Scal-holt, Clong
and Beorn, the one without and the other within, and both hallowed
it to Peter the Apostle as it had been before; but abbot Nicholas
held the discourse [?]. This was on the day of the passion of Vitus
[June 15]. And after the hours, bishop Clong asked all those who had
been at the hallowing of the church, and who thought fit to do so,
to take dinner there. And this was done more out of magnificence
than prudence, because it is always found to go one way when a man
depends or listens to many fools in cases where one wise man may well
foresee with prudence. And these gave proof of this forthcoming, for
there were no less than seven hundred [840] men took dinner there,
and the stores began to run short before the end. But the feast was
very splendid as all those thought who were bidden there, and all
men of worship were sent on their way with great gifts.

8. Bishop Clong had the church that he had built at Scal-holt adorned
in the best way he could, until it was fairly fitted in every way. He
had a gold chalice made and set with gem-stones, and gave it to the
church. He also had a book of hours written much better than what
was there before. It was his whole business at once to teach the
young priests, and recite and sing the psalter, and he would give
orders withal wherever it was needed. He was more self-disciplined
in many ways than the other bishops before him had been, in vigils
and fastings and wearing of garments. He would often walk bare-foot
of a night in snow and frost.

9. When Clong had been bishop ten winters, bishop Beorn of Holar died
two nights after Luke's-mass [Oct. 20, 1163], when he had been bishop
fifteen winters. And the next summer priest Brand Sæ-mund's son was
chosen bishop, and he took out with him the writ of bishop Clong to
go to archbishop Ey-stan withal, and he was hallowed bishop on the
last Mary-mass [Sept. 8], and he was in Beorg-win [Bergen] through the
winter, and John Loft's son also, and afterwards the bishop came out
[to Iceland] the next summer, and sat down in his bishop's see at
Holar, whereto he was hallowed.

10. Bishop Clong kept up till his old age his dignity and popularity,
so that all they that were most worthy held him in high worth. But
when he began to grow old there came upon him a great disease, and it
took him first in the feet, which began to break open because of the
cold and penance and discomfort he had had. But when he began to grow
weary, because of old age and lack of health, then he sent out his
writ to archbishop Ey-stan asking his leave to put off his hand and
give over the land and duties of his bishopric, and to take another
man to be bishop in his stead, according to the example of bishop
Gizor. But word came back from the archbishop that he had leave to
choose and send a bishop to be hallowed, but that he should maintain
the performing of the hours and preaching so long as he was able,
though he were not able to make his visitations.

11. Bishop Clong went to the All-moot and there sought of the chiefs
that a man should be chosen as bishop, but it was the wish of all that
he himself should choose him whom he would, and he chose Thor-lac
Thor-hall's son who was then abbot in Thick-by. And it was a great
piece of good fortune for bishop Clong to have chosen that man after
him who is now a true saint, and all men know that there hath never
been any man in Iceland proven so to be, save the holy bishop Thor-lac
who was thus chosen bishop. Bishop Clong still kept the management of
the bishop's stead [Scal-holt] that season, albeit it was not easy to
manage, for at that time there was [but a poor income] to the bishop's
stead, but the out-goings did not lessen at all. Bishop Clong himself
handed over the management of the stead, and gave it into the hands
of bishop Thor-lac and the men whom he chose to help him therein. And
the last season that bishop Clong was alive he well-nigh never rose
out of his bed. Wherefore he made him ready against his death, as a
wise man would especially choose to do after long sickness.

12. Clong was hallowed bishop in the days of pope Eugenius by
archbishop Ans-kell, and in the days of Ey-stan and Sigurd, kings
of Norway. He was then seven winters of the fifth ten [47], and
he was bishop four-and-twenty winters. He died three nights after
Matthias-mass [Feb. 28], and so his anniversary goes--but four if
it be a leap-year; it was then Washing-day [Saturday] in Ember-days
after Good Friday. There were then passed from the birth of Christ
according to the general count of years, eleven hundred and sixty-nine
years [1176]. And he was buried beside the other bishops. But abbot
Thor-lac stood over him both at his burial and his death, and it was
in every way lucky for him that such a man should stand by him both
in his life and death as the blessed bishop Thor-lac is now proved
before God to be.

13. Many great tidings befell while Clong was bishop, though here
not many are set down. There was the fall of the brethren, the sons
of Gelle, the kings of Norway, Sigurd first and then Ey-stan, and
last Inge, and the death of archbishop John, and the fall of Hacon
Broad-shoulders, and the death of Beorn bishop of Holar. In the days
of bishop Clong was the martyrdom of Saint Thomas, archbishop in
England. And in his days there came fire up in Hecla-fell for the
second time. There was also an earthquake whereby there was loss
of life. These men (Icelanders) died while Clong was bishop: John
Sigmund's son, and Hren the abbot, Paul Thord's son, and God-mund
Cetil's son, priest Beorn-hedin the son of Sigurd, and Beine his
brother. The slaughter of Helge Shafto's son, and Nicholas Sigurd's
son was cut down at that time in Thrand-ham.

14. Now it must be manifest to us that there hath never been a man
of such magnificence in many ways in Iceland as bishop Clong was,
and we may also believe that his munificence will be remembered as
long as Iceland is inhabited.


[Epilogue and Prologue.]

Now we have come to the history that is to be told of the blessed
bishop Thor-lac, and this history [of him] is here composed for the
entertainment of good men [and for their good], as the others were
which have been written down here before. And well as the history of
each one goes, yet is there no fairer example in every way than that
which shall be told of that precious friend of God, bishop Thor-lac,
who by right may be called Beam and Gem of Saints, both in this land
and other places throughout the world. He may of a truth be called
the Apostle of Iceland, just as the holy Patrec is called the Apostle
of Ireland, for both these performed the mighty works of the very
apostles in their preaching and long-suffering towards disobedient
and wicked men.











ÞORLÁKS SAGA.


1. 1. Þann tíma es stýrðe Goðs Cristne Anacletus pape, en5 konungar
vóro yfer Norege Magnús Sigurðar son, ok Haraldr Gille, þá vas foeddr í
héraðe því á Íslande es Fliótz­hlíð heiter Þorlákr enn Helge, á boe
þeim es heiter at Hlíðar-enda, á því áre es Þorlákr byscop Rúnolfs
son andaðesc.

2. Eige bar af því naofn þeirra saman, at hann være efter Þorláke10
byscope heitenn, heldr af því, at sá es allt veit, ok aollo stýrer,
vilde þá virðing goera Þorláks byscops ens fyrra, at hans nafn vere
iamnan elskað ok dýrkað af aollom þeim maonnom es síðan hefer auðet
orðet at heyra ok vita dýrð ens sæla Þorláks byscops. Hefer Almáttegr
Goð þá dýrð veitta nafne ens sæla byscops, sem fyrr15 sagðe Salomon
enn Spake, at 'betra være gótt nafn an mikel auð­æve;' en þat vas
sannlega gótt es helgat vas under heilagre skírn, en blezat síðan
með byscoplegre tign. Hefer sá orðz-kviðr í þesso sannasc, at 'þat
es spáð es spaker mæla,' at þat nafn verðr nú [[89: 2.]] maorgom
golle betra þeim es á hann heita í sínom nauðsynjom. Þat sannasc nú
ok eige síðr í þesso mále, sem í aoðrom stað seger Heilaog Ritning,
at 'betra es gótt namn an dýrleg smyrsl:' af þvi at nú berr oft þá
raun á, at nú verðr oftlega þat groett [1478] af ákalle hans nafns,
es hvártke hefer áðr mátt heilt verða af smyrslom né af5 lækningom
þeim es menn hafa áðr með faret ok til leitað.

2. 1. Faðer Þorláks vas Þórhallr en móðer Halla; þau vóro vinsæl,
ok vel at ser. Hann vas far-maðr áðr hann sette bú, en hon vas
fengsaom ok forvitra. Þau vóro bæðe góðrar ættar ok gaofogra manna
framm í kyn. En þat má nú auðsýnt10 vesa at Goð hefer þat fagrlega
við oss emnt [1479] es hann hét fyre munn Davíðs spámannz, at 'blezat
munde verða kyn réttlátra manna,' ok má siá at þat hefer nú fagrlega
fyllzc ok framm komet í lífe ens sæla Þorláks byscops. Frændr Þorláks
ener naónozto vóro réttláter ok ráðvander; haofðo fiaol-skylde mikel
[1480], en feár-hlut ú-gnógan.15 Þorlákr vas þá ungr at aldre es þau
brugðo búe síno faðer hans ok móðer.

2. Hann vas úlíkr flestom ungom maonnom í sínne upp-foeðingo, auðráðr
ok auð-veldr í aollo; hlýðenn ok hog-þeckr hverjom manne; fá-látr ok
fá-lyndr um allt; nýtr ok nám-giarn þegar á20 unga aldre. Hann nam
Psaltara áðr an sundr-skilja yrðe lið [1481] móðor hans ok faoðor,
en líteð hafðe hann bóc-nám annat í fyrsto.


[[90: 3.]]

En svá vas hann þegar athoga-samr á unga aldre, at maorgom vitrom
maonnom fundosc orð um [1482]. En þótt hann hefðe eige miket nám á
barns aldre, þá geck fyrer þat í hans haóttom sem hann hefðe nálega
allt þat numet sem þá mátte hónom betr sama an áðr. Hann þýddesc
eige leika né lausung; vas hann vakr ok vel5 stilltr; ok lét þess
snimma á kenna, at hann moende þau heilræðe þýðasc vilja, es Davíð
kenner í Psaltara, at 'maðr skyle hneigja sik frá íllo ok goera gótt;
leita friðarens, ok fylgja hónom.'

3. 1. Sem móðer hans sá af sínne vizko með Goðs forsiaó, hve dýrlegr
kennemaðr Þorlákr mátte verða af sínom10 góðom haóttom, ef nám hans
genge framm, þá réðosc þau moeðgin í enn oezta haofoð-stað í Odda under
haond Eyjolfe preste Sæmundar syne, es bæðe hafðe haofðingskap mikenn
ok lærdóm góðan, goezko ok vitz-mune gnoegre an flester aðrer. Ok
heyrðo ver enn sæla Þorlák þat vitne bera hónom, at hann þóttesc
trautt þvílíkan15 dýrðar-mann reynt hafa, sem hann vas: ok sýnde hann
þat síðan, at hann vilde eige hiá ser láta líða þau heilræðe um sínn
meistara, sem til gaf enn sæle Póll Postole sínom lære-sveinom, talande
svá til þeirra þeim á-heyrandom: 'Veseð ér efter-glíkjarar míner sem
ek em Christz;' af þvi at svá bar opt til, þá es ver hældom hans20
haóttom góðom, at hann kvað þat vesa siðvenjor Eyjolfs fóstra síns
[[91: 3.]] Sæmundar sonar. Goerðe hann þat maklega þótt hann virðe
hann mikels í sínne um-roeðo, þvi at þat vas hónom í at launa.

2. Eyjolfr virðe Þorlák mest allra sínna lære-sveina um þat allt,
es til kennemann-skapar kom, af þvi at hann sá af sínne vizko ok hans
meðferð sem síðarr reyndesc, at hann moende fyrer þeim5 aollom verða
um þat; sem síðarr seger.

3. Þorlákr tók vígslor þegar á unga aldre allar, unz hann vas diácn,
af Magnúse byscope; en hann vas þá fimmtán vetra gamall es byscop
andaðesc. En því fóro vígslor hans skiótt framm, at þat fundo
yferboðarner, at hann hog-leidde sialfr, ok gætte í út-horn10 þess
vanda, es fylgðe hverre vígslo þeirre es hann tók: ok svá skiótt sem
framm fór nám hans ok vígslor, þá lét hann til sín at fyrer-boðe
[1483] koma með ráðenne staðfesto alla mann-koste þá es vígslonom
aótto til at heyra. Lét hann ser þat í hog koma, meðan nám vas minna
en vígslor smære, es Ysidorus byscop mæler, spakr15 ok heilagr: at
'bæðe es nytsamlegt at nema mart, ok lifa réttlega; en ef eige má
bæðe senn verða, þá es enn dýrlegra at lifa vel.' Hann gætte þess ok,
þótt meirr fylgðe lítilæte ok þiónkan enom smærrom vígslom, helðr an
soemð mikel veraldar virðinga, at hann hélt aollom mann-dygðom þeim
es fylgja aótto enom minna vanda,20 þá es hann vas hafiðr á ena hærre
palla vanda ok virðingar með enom stoerrom vígslom.

4. Sú vas þá hans iðja, es hann vas á ungom aldre, at hann vas laongom
at bók-náme; en at rite oftlega; á boenom þess í [[91: 4.]] miðlom;
en nam, þá es eige dvalðe annat, þat es móðer hans kunne kenna hónom,
ætt-víse ok mann-froeðe.

4. 1. Þá er Magnús byscop vas andaðr, þá vas nockora stund byscopslaust
í Scála-holte; ok goerðesc þá kenne-manna-fátt; varð þat þá ráð
manna, at biðja Biaorn byscop til at5 goera vígslor á Alþinge; ok
lét hann at boen manna, ok vas þá vígðr til prestz Þorlákr ok marger
aðrer kenne-menn. En es hann vas prestr, ok hann tók sialfr stiórn ok
forráð tíða-goerðar, þá vas þat brátt auðsýnt, hvé geymenn ok gætenn
hann moende at vesa um tíðer sínar, ok allt þat annat es hónom vas á
hende folget með10 þeirre vígslo es hann hafðe þá fenget. Hann fór þá
enn lítelátlega með síno ráðe sem fyrr; ok tók ser, þá es leið [1484]
eno fyrsto missere, lítel þíng fé-saom; ok hafðe þau nockora stund; ok
varð hónom bæðe gótt til feár ok vinsælða, af þvi at nálega unne hónom
hug-aóstom hvert barn es hiá hónom vas. Hafa ok þau maorg góð doeme
sótt15 enn sæla Þorlák byscop es siald-gæt hafa orðet maorgom aoðrom,
at hann vas þá bæðe senn, ungr ok gamall; vas ungr at aldre, en gamall
at raóðom. Hann skrýddesc þá enn á nýja-leik maorgom mann-kostom;
ok allra mest þeim es Davíð kallaðe kenne-man­nenom í skyldazta lage
at 'þeir skyldo skrýðasc hialpræðom ok20 réttlæte.' Ok sýnde hann
þat síðan alla sína æve, at hónom varð [[92: 4.]] þat nálega aldrege
of-hent [1485] þá es til þurfte at taka, ok nuto þeir aller es hónom
vóro í naónd.

2. En es því hafðe nockora stund framm faret, ok hónom vas þá ok gótt
til feár orðet, þá fýstesc hann útan-ferðar, ok vilde þá kanna siðo
annarra góðra manna; ok fór hann af Íslande. Ok es5 ecke sagt af
hans ferðom unz hann kom í Paris, ok vas þar í scóla svá lenge sem
hann þóttesc þurfa til þess náms sem hann vilde þar nema. Þaðan fór
hann til Englannz, ok vas í Lincolne, ok nam þar enn miket nám, ok
far-sæligt [1486] bæðe ser ok aoðrom; ok hafðe þá enn miket gótt þat
af ser at miðla í kenningom sínom, es10 hann vas áðr trautt iam-vel
til búenn sem áðr.

3. En es hann hafðe vj aór af Íslande veret, þá vitjaðe hann aftr
til frænda sínna ok fóstr-iarðar; ok urðo hónom fegner frændr ok
fóst-broeðr, ok aller hans ást-viner; ok móðer hans þeim mun fegnozt
ok systr, sem þeim vas mest at-langt; en mest niðr-fall í15 ef nockot
hefðe tálmat hans til-kvaómo.

4. Móðer hans fylgðe hónom í sífello, síðan es hann kom út; en hann
veitte ástsamlega á-siaó systrom sínom, Ragneiðe, móðor Póls es
síðan varð byscop efter Þorlák byscop; en annarre Eyvaoro: ok hafðe
hann miok langa skap-raun af þeirra haóttom, es eige20 vóro efter
hans skap-lynde: en þó kom þat til góðra lykða um [[93: 5.]] síðer,
með Goðs miskunn, ok góðo til-stille þeirra manna es hlut aótto í,
ok góðvilja þeirra sialfra.

5. Hann vas þá með sama lítelæte eðr meira, es hann kom aftr or sínne
braut-ferð, sem hann hafðe áðr veret; en eige hafðe hann sótt skart eða
þessa heims skraut, sem margr annarr, es minne5 fremð ok gæfo soeker í
sínne braut-ferð, an hann hafðe sótt. Þat es ok margra manna siðvenja,
at þeir búasc þá vandlegar at vaópnom ok klæðom, es þeir koma út or
faor, ok þeir koma í meira val um slíka hlute, an þeim hafe áðr til
gefeð [1487]. En Þorlákr hafðe ser at farar-blóma lærdóm ok lítelæte,
ok marga góða siðo þá es10 hann sá í sínne ferð með maorgom góðom
maonnom, byscopom ok aoðrom lærðom maonnom ok ráð-vaondom, þeim es
enn ero nær-komner at heims-vistom [1488] því sem fyrer aondverðo
hefer hafezc Goðs Cristne ok síðan magnasc.

6. Þorlákr vas þá enn með frændom sínom nockora vetr, ok15 hafðe þá
miok góðan feár-hlut með haondom; ok saó þat marger vitrer menn þeir es
hiá hónom vóro, at hann vas þá enn til margra hluta stórra ok góðra enn
betr fallenn, þeirra es miklo varðaðe, an áðr hann foere [1489] braut.

7. En es eige liðo langar stunder, þá fýsto frændr Þorláks, at20 hann
skylde staðfesta sítt ráð nockot meirr an þá vas; ok vildo þeir helzt
at hann kvángaðesc; þóttosc þeir þat siá mega, at hann [[93: 5.]] vas
[1490] fé-maðr ok forsiá-maðr mikell um flest. En Goðs Cristne hefer
lenge eflsc ok magnasc, ok vaxet vande lærðra manna, fyrer boðorða
saker; af þvi at þá vas eige um þat miok vandat af yfer-boðom,
þótt prestar fenge eckna; en nú es þat fyrer-boðet. En þá vóro þær
konor svá í heraðe, es baztr kostr þótte í vesa, es5 eckjor vóro. Nú
varð Þorlákr at því ráðe eggjaðr; ok fór hann síðan, ok frændr hans
með hónom, á boe þann es í Háfe heiter, ok ætlaðe at biðja ser
eckjo þeirrar virðolegrar, es þar bió; ok vas við þeim teket þar
forkunnar-vel. En es þeir tóko svefn efter góðan beina á þeirre enne
saomo nótt, þá sýndese Þorláke í draume10 maðr gaofolegr yfer-litz ok
með soemelegom búninge, ok mælte: 'Hvert hafeð ér ætlað higat yðvart
oerende,' seger hann, 'ef ér megot ráða?' Þorlákr svarar: 'Ec veit
eige (at) hverjo verða vill,' seger hann. Sá mælte es hónom sýndesc í
draumenom: 'Veit-ek,' sagðe hann, 'at þú ætlar þer her kono at biðja;
en þú15 skalt þat mál eige upp láta koma, af þvi at þat mun eige ráðet
verða; ok es þer aonnor brúðr miklo oeðre hugot; ok skaltu oengrar
annarar fá.' En es hann hafðe þetta mælt, þá hvarf hann frá hónom at
sýn. En Þorlákr vaknar; ok vas hann þá svá frá horfenn þesso mále,
at hann bað aldregi kono þaðan frá. Fóro þeir á20 braut, ok vóro þau
(eckjan) góðer viner alla æve síðan. En þeim þótte nockot kynlegt,
hví hann vas svá hverf-lyndr í þesso mále, áðr þeir visso hvat til
hafðe komet; en þá kunno aller vel es visso. [[94: 6.]] Efter þenna
atburð allan iam-saman, þá kveykðesc eige hogr hans til metnaðar
þó (at) hónom være vitrað af Goðe, at hann ætlaðe hónom enn oeðre
forlaog, an hans frændr hefðe til hogat, ok hann sialfr sam-þyksc við;
heldr tók [1491] hann sik þá því fastara í lítelæte efter allra enna
baozto manna doemom, at því lítelátare hafa aller5 veret sem þeir
hafa hærra genget í Goðs auglite; efter heilræðom Almáttegs Goðs,
es hann mæler svá, at 'Hverr sá er sik læger, mon verða upp hafiðr,'
ok, 'Nemeð-ér at mer, þvi at ek em miúkr ok lítelátr í hiarta míno;
ok monoð-ér finna hvílð aondom yðrom.' Ok þá es þann veg hafðe eige
lenge framm faret, þá lýstesc brátt10 yfer hvat hónom bió í skape.

5. 1. Í þann tíma réð fyrer (þeim) boe es í Kirkjo-boe heiter á Síðo,
ágætr kenne-maðr sá es Biarn-heðinn hét, ok vas enn dýrðlegzte maðr
at alþýðo dóme. Hann vas vitr maðr ok vinsæll; oerr ok miok orð-foerr;
linr ok lærðr vel; en es hvárr15 þeirra frá til annars, þeirra Þorláks,
þá goerðe hvárn þeirra fúsan til sam-visto við annan; ok lét Goð þat
efter þeim, sem hann es vanr, at láta réttar fýster efter ráð-vaondom
maonnom; ok fór þá at vista-fare Þorlákr í Kirkjo-boe; ok vas þar vj
[1492] vetr í samt. Ok fengo þeir þat þá reynt es Goð seger svá, at
'Ok mítt es sætt en20 byrðr mín es létt.'

2. Vas þá bæðe, at eykerner vóro sterker fengner under oket, [[95:
6.]] enda baóro þeir [1493] léttlega; af þvi at þeir tóko þá nálega
allan vanda at bera fyr því folke aollo, es þau heroð bygðo es þeim
vóro nálæg. Skifto þeir ok svá við sína under-menn, at þeir tóko af
þeim þungar byrðar, es á þá haofðo lagzt af mótgerðom ok mein-mælom
við Goð ok góða menn, en efter-læte við Fiándann; en laogðo á þá
í5 staðenn Goðs byrðar, léttar ok linar, í hógværom skriftom ok
auð-veldom yfer-bótom. Drógosc þeir merkilega þau naofn under, es
Almáttegr Goð kallaðe sína Postola liós þessa heims; þvi at þeir lýsto
líknar-braut til eilífra fagnaða, bæðe með ágætlegom kenningom orða
ok dýrlegra doema. Mátte þat siá á hvers-daglegom10 þeirra atferðom,
at þeir urðo sialdan af-hoga því, es Goð mælte til sínna lære-sveina:
'Lýse liós yðvart fyre maonnom,' sagðe hann, 'at þeir neme yðvar
atferðer góðar; (ok) dýrke þeir [1494] Faoðor yðvarn þann es á
himnom es.' Svá sýndesc þeim sem ásamt vóro við þá, sem nálega være
oengar þær stunder, at eige mætte nockot þat15 af þeim lesa [1495],
es goeðe vóro í; vóro þeir ok svá sam-lynder ok sam-þycker at góðo,
sem Lucas seger af Goðs Postolom, at svá mátte þickja sem þeir hefðe
'eitt hiarta ok eina aond.' Fór þat þá víða um héruð, hverso ó-glíker
þeir þótto flestom maonnom vesa í sínom fram-ferðom. Vas þat þá þegar
vitra manna mál, at hverge20 moende vesa vænna til at leita an þar,
þótt mann þyrfte at ráða til [[95: 7.]] ens mesta vanda á Íslande;
ok vas þat eige mis-sét [1496], at því sem síðar reyndesc.

6. 1. Fyrer þeim boe í því heraðe es annarr vas baztr, ok Þykkva-boer
heiter [1497], réð sá maðr es Þorkell hét, ok vas Geira son [1498],
auðegr at fé, en spakr at mann-vite. En es hann5 tók nockot at eldasc,
en átte oenga all-nána frændr til erfðar efter sik, þá goedde hann
sína frændr með auðoefom; en frelste ser þann fiár-hlut til forráða
es efter vas, mikenn ok fríðan. Hann lýste þá yfer því, at hann vilde
Crist kiósa ok hans helga menn ser til erfingja allz þess feár es þá
vas efter; ok vilde reisa canoca-setr í10 Þyckva-boe. En þat mál vas
vant at semja í fyrsta sinne; ok leitaðe hann af því þat fyrst til at
fá, es vandazt vas: mannenn þann es regolo mætte setja, þá es þeir
menn skyldo hafa es þar vildo til hrein-lífis ráðasc. Hann fór þá í
Kirkjo-boe, ok skoraðe á Þorlák at hann réðesc til; en hann let þat
ecke all-torsótt við15 sik vera, af þvi at hann hafðe þat áðr í hog ser
haft, at hafna heime, ok ráðasc under regulo, efter orðom Almáttegs
Goðs, es hann kallar oengan at fullo mega vesa sínn læri-svein,
nema hann láte alla sína eign fyrer Goðs saker, ok þióne hónom þá
síðan með hreinom hog. En þó leitaðe hann þá efter við Biarn-heðin
prest,20 hverso hónom mætte þat í skap falla, eðr hve ráðlegt hónom
sýndesc at hann iáttaðesc under þann vanda es hann vas beiddr. En
[[96: 7.]] Biarn-heðinn sagðe svá, at hónom moende sá dagr mikell
þickja es Þorlákr réðesc or Kirkjo-boe at vista-fare; en þó lézc
hann eige þess nenna miok at letja, es hann sá margra manna hiaolp
við liggja. Vas þá síðan staðr settr í Þyckva-boe, at ráðe ok for-sió
Kloengs byscops ok allra héraðs-manna; ok síðan rézc Þorlákr5 þangat,
ok vas þar þá sett canoca-setr.

2. En þann dag es Þorlákr fór al-fare or Kirkjo-boe, þá leidde alþýða
manna hann or garðe, ok þótte aollom miket fyrer at skil­jasc við
hann. En es Biarn-heðinn kom heim, geck hann í skála, ok sá [1499]
í rúm Þorláks ok mælte með aloga miklom: sagðe10 þar þat rúm vesa,
es alldregi munde síðan iam-vel vesa skipat, ef hann skipaðe eige
sialfr. Vas sú ok Þorláks umb-roeða alla æve síðan, es bæðe vas í
gæfa staðnom ok þeim es fyrer réðo, at hann hefðe aldregi síno ráðe
iam-vel unat sem þá sex vetr es hann vas í Kirkjo-boe; ok hefer maorg
stór virðing til þess staðar lagezc [1500]; ok15 vas siá mikel; af
þvi at þat má glíklegt þickja, at þar mone bazt at flesto veret hafa
es hann unðe ser bazt.

3. Þá vas Þorlákr vel half-fertoegr es hann rézc í Ver; ok vas þar vij
vetr. Canoca-vígslo tók hann fyrst, ok vas þá í fyrsto prior settr yfer
þá canoca es þar vóro; ok samðe hann þegar svá fagr­lega20 þeirra líf,
at á því lék þá orð vitra manna, at þeir hefðe hverge iam-góða siðo
séna, þar es eige hafðe lengr regolo líf saman veret an þar.

[[96: 8.]]

4. En efter þat vígðe Kloengr byscop Þorlák til ábóta í Vere; ok
tók hann þá af nýjo merkilega stiórn at hafa yfer þeim broeðrom es
hann vas yfer settr. Hann bauð þeim at halda ástúð ok sam-þycke sín
á miðle, ok tiáðe þat fyrer þeim, hve miket í keyptesc, es sonr Goðs
seger svá: at 'hvar sem saman samnasc tveir eðr þrír5 í Hans nafne,
at Hann monde þeirra á miðlom vesa.' Vas hann um allt enn sið-vandazte
fyrer þeirra haond, enda [1501] vas þeim hvers-vitna vel fengit.

5. Halla, móðer Þorláks, var með hónom alla æve, meðan hon lifðe:
en hann hafðe fenget fé systrom sínom baóðom áðr hann10 réðesc under
regolo-haldet. Vas hann ástsamr aollom sínom frændom þá sem áðr:
en andlegr faðer aollom þeim es hann vas yfer skipaðr. Hann bannaðe
broeðrom flaokr ok farar allar þær es eige bar nauðsyn til; en bauð
þeim at þeir skyldo sem iamn-lyndzter vesa at góðom hlutom í sínne
þiónosto, efter því sem Póll Postole15 hefer kennt í sínom Pistle:
'Biðesc ér fyrer,' sagðe hann, 'án afláte, ok goeret Goðe þacker
í aollom hlutom.' Seger svá ok sialfr Goðs Sonr, at 'Sá hverr es
holpenn es hann staðfestesc í góðo verke til enda lífs síns.' Bauð
hann þeim vandlega þaogn at halda þá es þat vas skylt; en hafa góða
munnz-haofn [1502] þá es málet vas20 leyft. En at orðom Póls Postola,
'Spilla íll maól,' seger hann, 'góðom siðom,' Má þat ok siá, hve skylt
vesa mun í því lífe at halda sik frá heimlegom ok íllom orðom, ef þó
skal rangt þó at gótt sé [[97 : 8.]] mælt, þá es skylt es at þegja, sem
Davið seger í Psaltara: 'Lítilátr em-ek,' sagðe hann, 'ok þagða-ek yfer
góðom hlutom.' Því þóttesc hann lítilátr, at hann vas iamnan fúsare at
mæla gótt an íllt, ok batzc hann þó oft hvárs-tveggja fyrer Goðs sakar.

6. Menn fóro til Canoca-setrs Þorláks or aoðrom munk-lífom5 eðr
reglo-staoðom, bæðe samlender ok útlender, at siá þar ok nema góða
siðo; ok bar þat hverr frá es þaðan fór, at hverge hefðe þess komet,
at þat líf þoette iam-fagrlega lifat sem þar es Þorlákr hafðe fyrer
sét. Þá et fyrsta fundo þat marger menn, at þar vas til mikels góðs
at siá es hann vas, fyrer goezko saker, þess es aðrer haofðo10 eige
faong á því-líkt af ser at miðla. Marger gengo þeir heiler af hans
funde þá es hann veitte þeim blezan ok yfer-soengva, es með ymsom
meinom kómo á hans fund.

7. Mart bar þat annat hónom til handa es marger virðo þá þegar til
iartegna. Sá at-burðr varð,... [1503] þá es hann vas þar staddr,
at15 eldr kom í hús; en þá es hann Þorlákr kom til ok blezaðe,
þá slocknaðe eldrenn. Ef fénaðr sýktesc þá batnaðe ofallt við hans
yfer-soengva, ef lífs vas auðet. Vatz-vígslor hans vóro merkilegar,
svát baoðe feck bót af menn ok fénaðr. Ef vatne því vas dreift yfer
fénað es Þorlákr hafðe vígt, þá grandaðe því nálega hvártke20 sótter
né veðr, eða dýr. Ef mýss goerðo mein á mat eða klæðom, [[98: 9.]] þá
kom fall í þær, eða hurfo allar af vatneno, ef því vas yfer stoekt,
ok foere þeir svá með aollo sem hann lagðe ráð til. Fór vatneð þá
þegar um aoll ná-læg heroð, en um allt Ísland síðan es Þorlákr varð
byscop; af þvi at menn þóttosc hver-vitna bót á finna um þat sem þá
bar mesta nauðsyn til. En þó fóro vitrer menn varlega með5 þeirre
umb-roeðo, at kalla þat berar iartegner, eða þýða þat einkan­lega
hans heilagleik. Þvi at svá mæler Heilaog Ritning: 'Eige skaltú lofa
mann í lífe síno; lofa hann efter lífet, ok mikla hann efter aombon
lífsens.' Ok es þat af því mælt, at þat má goerasc at ábyrgð, bæðe
þeim es þat mæla fyr an lok ævennar ero vitoð10 til fullz; ok þat kann
ok vesa, at þess hog sialfs locke sú umb-roeða til nockors metnaðar:
ok má nú þat siá hverso því es ráðet es menn hafa þeim heil-ræðom
fylgt í þesso mále, at fáer lofoðo hann of miok í lífeno. En leiteð
nú at lofa ok dýrka hann á allar lunder sem faong ero á, ok ér vitoð
dýrð hans ok heilagleik.15

7. 1. Sem ráð ok líf ens heilaga Þorláks skein með slíkom blóma síns
reinlífis ok goezko, ok fagrlegrar forsiá annarra ráðs sem nú vas
frá sagt: þá lét Almáttegr Goð til þess rýma sem hann hafðe áðr firer
hogat, at hans vegr skylde magnasc ok vaxa or því sem þá vas. En þat
varð með þeim hætte, at--20

2. Þá es Kloengr byscop goerðesc miok aldre orpenn, þá tók hann
van-heilso mikla; opnoðosc foetr hans, ok goerðesc hann þá [[98:
9.]] miok van-foerr til síns embættess fyrir van-heilso saker. En
hann hafðe þá leyfe þeget af Eysteine erki-byscope til þess at maðr
være til byscops koerenn [1504] efter hann: fór Kloengr byscop þá til
Alþingess, ok sótte at vine sína, at maðr yrðe ráðenn til útan-ferðar;
ok vóro þá lagðar stefnor til. Þat sama sumar fór til Alþingess, svá
sem5 sendr af Goðe, Þorlákr ábóte, fyrer þær saker es hónom þótte
nauðsyn til bera; af þvi at hann vas alldregi vanr heiman at fara
nauðsynjalaust. Þá es umb-roeða tóksc um þetta mál þá vóro þrír menn
under kosning nefnder, þeir es bazt þótto til fallner af aollom; ok
vas einn af þeim Þorlákr ábóte; annarr ábóte hét Ogmundr, enn10 meste
skaorungr; (enn) þriðe vas prestr es Póll hét, lærdóms-maðr mikell ok
enn meste bú-þegn. Bar þat fagrt vitne hverjom þeirra, at þess fýstesc
hverr mest es kunnaztr vas. En þess kende at um Þorlák, at hann hafðe
sik eige miok upp hafið í metnaðe þeim es sialf-virðing heiter; ok
hrósaðe hann meirr góð-goerningom15 sínom í Goðs auglite an manna;
ok kost-gæfðe hann enn meirr at vesa af-bragð annarra manna í sínne
goezko, an sýnasc svá fyre augom skyn-lítilla manna. Ok varð svá af
því, at maorgom þótte ser hann ú-kunnastr þeirra es þá vóro í vale:
ok vas þat af því várkunnlegt, at hann hafðe maorgom maonnom vereð
eige all-nálægr20 at héraða-vistom ok heimile. Þorlákr vas fá-málogr
á þeim funde; en marger vóro aðrer fiol-orðer þeir es þesse stór-mæle
horfðo [[99: 9.]] miðr til handa an hónom. Vas þá efter leitað við
Þorkel Geira son es reyndr vas at rétt-yrðe, en kunnast Þorláks ráð
af vitrom maonnom ok gaofgom, hverr skaorungr Þorlákr være, eðr hvé
mikell orða-maðr hann være. En Þorkell svaraðe: 'Meirr kost-gæfer
Þorlákr,' seger hann, 'at goera allt sem bazt, an mæla sem flest.'5
Þau svaor fello maonnom vel í skap, ok laogðo marger þá þegar meira
ástar-hog til Þorláks, es þeir heyrðo svá virðoligan vitnis-burð
hans hátta af svá vitrom manne ok vel stiltom. Urðo þau mála-lok,
at kosningr vas lagðr under Kloeng byscop, at hann skylde kiósa af
þeim es í vale vóro. En hann kaus Þorlák til útan-ferðar,10 ok at
taka byscops vígslo efter sik, ok þann vanda allan es því fylgðe.

Petrs-messo dag koere Kloengr byscop Þorlák til byscops, ok vilde þá
þegar selja hónom í hendr aoll staðar-forraóð. En es þesse kosningr
vas fallenn til ens sæla Þorláks ábóta, þá sagðe hann ser þat miok á
óvart koma, ok kvazc fyrer því eige hafa15 undan genget at vesa í þeim
kosninge, at þá telðesc aðrer síðr undan, þeir es hann kallaðe bazt
til fallna. Talðesc hann miok undan ok sagðesc ecke vesa til fallenn
þessa vanda ok tignar. En þó mátte hann eige móte mæla kost-goefð
ok ákefð alþýðonnar, allra hellzt es hann grunaðe þat þá þegar,
sem síðar bar raun á, at20 þat vas Goðs vile; ok því samþycte hann
um síðer þessom kosninge. [1505]

3. Herra Þorlákr ábóte fór af þinge aftr í canoka-setr sítt, en [[99 :
10.]] bað Kloeng byscop, at hann skylde hafa forraóð stóls ok staðar
þau missere. En þá goerðosc fiár-hager ó-hoeger í Scála-holte; urðo
af-vinnor miklar, en tillaog lítil; var byscop [1506] eige foerr til
yfer-farar, ok tókosc af allar giafar; ok mátte þá eige lengr [1507]
svá framm flytjasc aoll missere at eige þyrfte þá stórra við-fanga
[1508].5

4. Efter Iól vóro menn sender or Scála-holte efter byscops-efne;
ok fór hann austan á Langa-faosto; ok með hónom Ioan Loftz son,
es þá vas mestr haofðinge á Íslande; ok kómo þeir til staðarens
í Scála-holt haolfom mánaðe fyre Pascer, ok vas þar Gizoerr Hallz
son fyrer. Þar vóro ok aðrer menn þeir es byscops viner vóro ok10
forsiá-menn héraðsens vóro. Tók þá Þorlákr við forraóðom staðarens;
ok vas þá þegar mikel skuld goer til þeirra nauðsynja es búet þurfte
at hafa. Hann hafðe þá þegar mikla skap-raun, bæðe af viðr-vist manna
ok aoðrom ó-hoegendom þeim es hann átte um at vesa, ok bar hann þær
allar þolin-móðlega.15

5. Kloengr byscop lá í reckjo með lítlom mætte, ok Þorlákr vas þá í
Scála-holte, af þvi at menn vildo eige at hann foere útan fyr sakar
ófriðar þess es þá vas miðlim Noregs ok Íslannz, es maólom vas ó-sett,
þeim es goerzc (haofðo) landa í miðlom af vígom ok feár-upp-tektom;
ok dvalðe hann þat um nockorra vetra saker. En es20 Kloengr byscop
andaðesc, ok at því kom at hónom þótte nauðsyn [[100: 11.]] til,
at eige være lengr byscops-laust í Scála-holte an þá hafðe veret,
þá lét hann eige lengr letjasc útan-ferðar. Kom þat fyrer ecke þótt
hann være lattr útan-ferðar fyrer ófriðar saker. Hann tók til orða
Póls Postola: 'Eige skoloð ér skelfasc við ótta vándra manna,' sagðe
hann. Vas hann þá síðan útan til búenn, ok vilde hann5 bæðe hafa
líteð fé, at því sem aðrer hafa haft, ok eige miket faoro-neyte;
ok greiddesc vel um hans ferð, unz þeir kómo viðr Noreg.

8. 1. Þá es Þorlákr electus kom á fund [1509] Eysteins erki-byscops,
þá tók hann við hónom forkunnar-vel; ok let hann þat brátt vitað
verða, at hann vilde allt leggja þat blíðlega til af10 sinne hende
es hann þóttesc skyldr til; en hann vilde hónom eige ellegar byscops
tign gefa nema samþycke konungs være til. Þeir haofðo þá ríke yfer
Norege feðgar, Magnus konungr ok Erlingr iarl faðer hans; ok tóko
þeir þunglega aollo Þorláks mále; ok kvómo þaðan hót fyrer hoegende,
at hvártge munde ó-hætt fé né maonnom.15 En Þorlákr lét ser líteð um
þat finnasc; ok sýnde þar sínn aloga vesa allan sem Davíð kenner í
Psaltara, at 'Betra sé Goðe at treystasc an haofðingjom,' ok lét hann
þetta af því hiá ser líða. En erki-byscop þóttesc sitja í miklom vanda,
es hann vilde hvára-tveggja elska; ok vilde hann þess gæta es Petar
[1510] Postole kenner í sínom20 Pistola: 'Óttesc ér Goð,' seger hann,
'en vegsameð konung.' [[101: 11.]] Mátte þat ok á aollo siá, at hann
vilde her hvárs-tveggja vandlega gæta í þeirra mále. Bar erki-byscop
þá boð á miðlom þeirra, ok aðrer góð-giarner menn; ok kom þar, at
konungrenn ok iarlenn sam-þykðo því, at Þorlákr toeke byscops-vígslo;
ok goerðesc þá vinganar-svipr þeirra á miðle, ok gaófosc þeir giaofom
áðr þeir5 skilðe. Ok hafðe Sverrer konongr þat oft uppe, es bæðe vas
merkr í mále ok spakr at mann-vite, at þeim feðgom hefðe þá aller
hluter léttazt genget es þeirra vas vingan á miðle, ok Þorlákr vas
þar í lande, bæðe í sóknom ok nálega vel-flest annat.

2. Þá vas Þorlákr vígðr til byscops af Eysteine erki-byscope á10
daogom Alexandri Pava, þrimr [1511] nóttom efter píningar-dag Petrs
ok Póls Postola. Við þá vígslo vas Eirekr Stafangrs byscop, es síðan
vas erki-byscop í Þróndheime efter Eystein erki-byscop: enn þriðe vas
við vígslo Þorláks byscops Póll Biaorgynjar byscop, mikell skaorungr
ok vinr Þorláks byscops alla æve síðan: Þorlákr byscop15 vas skamma
stund hiá erki-byscope síðan es [1512] hann hafðe vígslo þeget, af
þvi at hann visse goerst hve títt vesa mátte [1513] til-kvaómo hans
til Íslannz ok þeirra sauða es hann vas yfer skipaðr [1514].

3. En es Þorlákr vas skiliðr at sam-vistom við erki-byscop, en þeir
vóro efter aðrer með erki-byscope [1515], þá spurðo þeir byscoparner20
[[101, 392: 12.]] hverso hónom hefðe þockasc Þorlákr byscop. Hann
sagðe svá, at hann þóttesc enge [1516] byscop þann vígðan hafa, es
hónom þótte iam-goerla með ser hafa alla þá mann-koste, es byscopom
es skylt at hafa; sem Póll Postola seger í Pistola [1517] sínom þeim
es hann sende Tito: 'Byscop hoefer at sé,' sagðe hann, 'last-varr
ok lærðr vel;5 dramblauss ok dryckjo-maðr lítell; oerr ok ó-ágiarn;
skýrr ok skap-góðr; góð-giarn ok gest-risenn; réttlátr ok ráð-vandr;
hrein-lífr ok hag-ráðr; tryggr ok trú-fastr; mildr ok mál-diarfr;
ástsamr við alþýðo en ávítsamr við ó-roekna.' Ok má siá, at þat
es heilags mannz, at vesa með þeim hætte. 'Má-ek yðr svá noecqve
[1518]10 segja helzt hve vitrleger mer hafa virzc hans hætter,'
sagðe erki-byscop, 'at ek moenda þvílíkt kiósa mítt lífs doegr et
oefsta sem ek sá [1519] hans hvert.' Ok má nú þat siá, hve vitr ok
gloegg-sýnn hann hefer vereð um ráð ens sæla Þorláks byscops.

4. Byscop Þorlákr réðz þá til skips með sítt faoro-neyte. Ok þá15
es þeir vóro nálega búner, þá hlóðo stýre-menn skipet til ó-foers af
lausa-viðom, ok tveim skipom þeim es þeir tengðo útan við vígen. Þá
geck byscop á land upp af skipeno, ok sagðe stýre-maonnom, at hónom
þótte of miok hlaðet vesa. Þá svaraðe einn þeirra--sá hét Macan--'Þú
átt ecke vetta í skipeno,' sagðe hann, 'enda skallt-þú20 ecke ráða
hverso hlaða skal.' Byscop svaraðe: 'Ek fyr-býð [1520] yðr í Goðs
nafne,' sagðe hann, 'at hlaða til ú-foers; en ek fel yðr á hende
allra manna ábyrgð þeirra es með yðr fara.' Steig þá síðan [[102:
12.]] byscop á skip; ok léto þeir þá við svá-búet í haf. Ok es
þeir [1521] kómo miok at Íslande, þá goerðe á stór-viðre, ok fengo
þeir á-faoll mikel; geck í sundr drag-reipet, ok rak útan-borðz
seglet. Vildo þá aller heita; en Þorlákr byscop kvazc eige skyldo
heita nema kastað være. En es kastað vas því sem byscop vilde, þá féll
þegar veðret,5 ok tóko land næsta dag efter; ok kom Þorlákr byscop
heim í Scála-holt næsta dag [1522] fyrer Laurentius messo [1523].

9. 1. Menn urðo stórlega fegner hans til-kvaómo; ok tók hann þá
þegar at hafa stillilega stiórn á þeim hlutom, es til hans kvómo með
roeksamlegre ráðvende. Hann hélt þó10 nálega í aollo canoca-reglo
því es hann mátte við koma, þá es hann vas byscop orðenn, bæðe í
klæða-búnaðe, í vaokom, ok faostom, ok í boena-halde. Hann tók at
semja þá af nýjo heima-manna siðo ok hýbýla haótto, þá es þar héldosc
um hans daga vel í maorgo lage.15

2. Þorlákr byscop lagðe mesta aóst ok elsko á presta þá ok kenne-menn
es siðlátlega lifðo, ok sínar vígslor varð-veitto noeckot efter
á-kveðno; ok virðe þá alla soemelega, ok sette þá sællega, at því
sem faong vóro á. En þá lærða menn es miðr gætto siðlætis, ok sínar
vígslor varð-veitto óvarlegar, minte hann á með blíðlegom20 boðorðom
betr at goera, ok snúa síno ráðe áleiðiss ok annarra, [[102, 277:
12.]] þeirra es þeir aótto at á-byrgjasc. En þá es eige skipoðosc
við miúkar áminningar, ávítaðe hann með stillilegom stríð-mælom ok
hógværom hirtingom, svá sem Póll Postole kende Timotheo: 'Vara skaltú,
ok biðja, ok ávíta með allre þolinmoeðe ok læringo.'5

3. Hann hugðe vandlega fyrer staðar eign, ok sette þá [1524] menn
ofallt firer til fiár-forráða, es hann mætte friálsaztr vesa sialfr
frá þeirre aonn; en þó droegesc framm fiár-hlutr staðarens efter
því sem faong være á, þess es þó være til allz haft þess es hafa
þurfte. En svá hafðe hann vitrlega stilling á um fiár-hage, at aller
menn10 vitrer haofðo þá þegar á mále hve gótt um-stille hann þótte
um alla hlute hafa.

4. En svá mikla stund sem hann lagðe á um þá til-skipan es til auðræða
kom, at þat foere allt at baoztom haóttom, þá lagðe hann á þat þó
mestan hog, es til kirkjonnar kom, ok (at) kenne-maonnom15 være
allra hluta sem bazt fenget. Þat fylgðe ok þar með, at hann vandaðe
ok fyre kenne-maonnom þiónosto-goerð alla, ok kende þeim ástsamlega
allt embætte þat es þeir vóro skylder at fremja með sínom vígslom.

5. Hann samðe ok skrifta-boð fyrer aollom kenne-maonnom í20 sínne
byscops-sýslo, svá at aller buðo einn veg. Bauð hann ok aollom
maonnom til skrifta at ganga á hverjom tolf maónoðom um sinn et
sialdnazta; en aollom altaris-þiónom, ef þeir felle í haofoð-synðer,
[[102: 12.]] bauð hann hvert sinn at iátta sik áðr þeir fremðe Goðs
þiónosto eðr messo-saong. [1525]

6. Hann heimte saman lærða menn fyrer enar hæsto hátíðer heima í
Scála-holte, ok sagðe þá hvat hverr skylde at goera, þess at allt yrðe
fagrlega framet í Goðs auglite þat es þeir vóro5 skylder til. En svá
miok sem hann vandaðe fyrer aoðrom, þá goerðe hann sialfr allt bazt at,
svá at nálega kunno þat aller skilja frá aoðrom flestom lærðom maonnom,
hve ágætlega hann framðe í Goðs auglite alla þiónosto, es ynðe vas í,
á at siá ok heyra til.10

7. Þorlákr byscop kende opt kenningar; ok vas þat af því mikel
mann-raun, at hónom vas málet stirt ok ú-hoegt; en svá vóro orðen
soet ok vel saman sett, at ofallt mátte þeim þat í hog koma es hanns
kenningom hlýddo, sem Davíð seger í Psaltera, at 'Soetare ero maól
þín, Dróttenn, í kverkom,' seger hann, 'heldr an seimr ok15 hunang
í munne mínom.' Þau en saomo bar Þorlákr byscop framm Goðs maól með
svá faogrom doemom síns lífs, at þau maótto í einskiss mannz lífe,
hónom sam-tíða, iafn-dýrðleg finnasc.

8. Þorlákr byscop vakðe laongom um nætr þá es aðrer svófo, ok bazc
fyrer roekelega, at hann skylde þat oeðlasc, es Goð mælte: 'Sæll20 es
sá þræll,' seger hann, 'es Dróttenn finnr vakanda þá es hann koemr
at vitja hans,' es þat ok á kveðet í Goðs boðorðom, es hann mæler
svá sialfr: 'Vakeð ér,' seger hann, 'þvi at ér vitoð eige á hverre
tíð Dróttenn koemr.' Ok bar svá raun á, at Þorláke moende [[103:
13.]] þau orð [1526] sialdan or hog ganga; af þvi at þat hefer hónom
nú fram komet sem Goð hét þeim es opt urðo funner í skynsamlegre vaoko,
at hann moende setja þá yfer alla góða hlute sína efter þetta líf.

9. Heilagr Þorlákr byscop fastaðe miok þá es hann vas heima at stóle
sínom; ok mintesc hann á þat í því, es Dróttenn sagðe5 sialfr í
Goðspialle, at 'þat være sumt kyn fiánda [1527] at eige mætte sigra
nema með faosto ok boena-halde,' ok lét hann þat því saman fara í
síno lífe, at hann vilde yfer-stíga alla fiánda freistne.

10. Hann huggaðe þá es áðr vóro hrygger ok tiáðe þat fyrer þeim, es
Dróttenn sialfr mælte: at, 'Sé sæler es nú sýta, ok þeir10 mono sialfer
síðar huggasc,' ok í aoðro Goðspialle; es hann mælte við Postola sína:
'Hrygð yðor mon snúasc í fagnað,' seger hann.

11. Þorlákr byscop ástundaðe með aollo kost-gæfe at sam-þyckja þá
ok sætta [1528], es áðr vóro reiðer ok sundr-þycker; ok sagðe þeim
þat sem sagt vas ok satt es, at reiðen már miok rétt-sýne manna15
meðan hon fylger, sem Iacob [1529] Postole seger: at 'eige vinnr
[1530] réttlæte Goðs reiðe mannzens.' Ok í aoðrom stað: 'Sigrastú
eige af íllo, heldr sigraðú íllt með góðo:' þat es at sigra reiðena
með þolinmoeðe ok goezko.

12. Þorlákr byscop sá oft á helgar boecr, ok las yfer Helgar20 [[104:
13.]] Ritningar; af þvi at hann gleymðe eige því es Ióan Postole
mæler í sínne bóc: 'Sæll es sá es les ok heyrer orð þessarar boecr,
ok varðveitir þá hlute es á henne ero ritaðer.' Hann kende oft clercom
bæðe boecr at lesa, ok annat nám þat es þeim vas nytsamlegt; sá hann
hve mikel nauðsyn á vas gótt at kenna, sem Davíð seger í5 Psaltara:
'Komeð ér, syner, ok hlýðet mer, en ek man kenna yðr hverso Goð
skal óttasc'

13. Iafnan vas hann at rite, ok ritaðe ofallt helgar boecr efter doemom
Póls Postola [1531], es hann sagðe í sínom pistola: 'Eige ritom ver
yðr aðra hlute an þá es yðr es mest þaorf at lesa ok at vita.'10

14. En hvatki es Þorlákr byscop hafðesc at annat, þá vóro hans varrar
alldrige kyrrar frá Goðs lofe ok boena-halde, þvi at hann hog-leidde
þat es Iacob Postole [1532] seger í sínom pistola, at 'miket má
fyrer Goðe sí-feld boen réttlátz mannz:' hefer ok miket stoðat hans
boena-hald, bæðe hónom ok maorgom aoðrom. Byscop vas linr15 ok miúkr í
aollom atgoerðom [1533], ok heil-ráðr um allt, es hann vas at sóttr;
hefer hann þat nú ok oeðlasc, es Goð hefer heiteð þeim, es þann veg
være lynder, es hann mæler í Goðspialleno: 'Sæler 'ro miúkláter,
þvi at þeir mono oeðlasc eilífa iaorð lifande manna [1534].'

15. Þorlákr byscop soeng hvern dag messo bæðe ser til hialpar20 ok
aoðrom, ok minntesc í sí-fello píningar Goðs sonar: ok hefer [[104:
13.]] hann nú því fagrlegre aombon teket fyrer sína þiónosto-goerð,
sem hann framðe oftarr þat embætte ok merkilegar an flester aðrer.

16. Hann lagðe mikla stund á at elska fátoeka menn; klædde hann
kalna, en foedde hungraða; ok vas þat auð-sýnt, at hónom geck þat
sialdan er hog hvat fyr haondom es á Dóms-dege: hve5 miok þat es
kallat at á hirte ríðe [1535] hverso til fátoekra manna vas goert
í þesso lífe. Þat lagðe hann ok við um þat framm sem flester góðer
menn hafa goert áðr, at hann lét kalla saman fátoeka menn fyrer enar
hærsto hátíðer, tolf, eðr nio, eðr siau, eða fimm [1536], ok kom til
leynelega at þvá foetr þeirra, ok þerrðe síðan með háre síno, ok10 gaf
hverjom þeirra noeckora góða olmoso, áðr á braut foere; ok goerðe hann
helldr svá at Goðs doemom an manna, es fyrr þó foetr postola sínna,
ok lét síðan pínasc til lausnar aollo mann-kyne; mælte ok svá sonr
Goðs, þá es hann hafðe þveget foetr postola sínna, 'Goereð ér efter
doemom mínom þeim sem nú goerer ek við yðr.'15 Lét af því enn sæle
Þorlákr byscop fóta-þváttenn fara fyrer miskunnar giaofenne.

17. Eige maótto ok hans ást-viner ok trúnaðar-menn yfer því þegja efter
andlát hans, es þeir þóttosc goerla vita, at hann hafðe þá leynda
hlute með ser í mein-lætom ok góð-gerningom es hann20 trúðe oengom
til at vita; sem Goð býðr, at 'eige skole vita en vinstre haond, hvat
en hoegre goerer.' Þórðo ok eige þat ást-viner [[105: 13.]] byscops
síðan berara at goera, es hann vilde sialfr svá leynt vesa láta.

10. 1. Þorlákr byscop vas oft vanr at hafa roeðor við góða menn
ok sið-láta, ok kynna ser svá þeirra siðo, ok styrkja þá í sínom
heilræðom, at þeir mætte haldasc í sínne5 goezko. Hann hélt
ok mikenn vaorð á þeirra manna ráðe es [eige] gætto sína gloepe
[1537], at leiða þá frá raongom girndom; ok kalla[ðe] þá aftr til
leiðrétto síns máls, þó at áðr hefðe eige vel til gæzc: þvi at
þat mælte Dróttenn: 'Eige vil-ek dauða synðogs mannz,' sagðe hann,
'heldr vil-ek at hann snúesc til mín ok life.' Sýnde10 þetta enn sæle
Þorlákr byscop aollom þeim es iðrasc vildo sínna and-marka; ok ef
þeir vildo hans raóðom fylgja, varð hann þeim fegenn, ok líknaðe þeim
linlega með létt-bærom skriftom, efter því sem sagðe Spámaðr Goðs,
at 'á hverjo doegre es maðr vilde til Goðs snúasc, at hann munde þá
lifa góðo lífe, en deyja eige íllom15 dauða.' En þá es eige vildo
á-leiðis snúasc við hans blíðar umb-roeðor [1538], ok eige fyri-láta
[1539] sína van-hage við hans stríð-mæle, þá forboðaðe hann suma,
en bann-sette suma, efter því sem Christr bauð lære-sveinom sínom:
'Hirta skoloð ér broeðr yðra ást-samlega; en ef eige láta hirtasc,
þá leiðesc ér þá sem aðra villo-menn eða20 heiðingja.' Hann bar
þolen-móðlega mein-goerðer manna, en harm­aðe miok van-hage manna;
en sam-þykðesc alldregi við sið-leysor [[106: 15.]] vándra manna; þvi
at hann vas þess fúss at heyra þat es Goð mæler: 'Sæler'ro þolenmóðer,
þvi at þeir mono kallasc Goðs syner.' Hónom þótte íll ó-hlýðne manna;
fyrer þvi at hann grætto [1540] andar-saór sínna under-manna; svá
sem Póle postola vas gefet við Goðs Cristne á sínom daogom, at oengom
manne vas þat til meins eðr angrs, at eige5 þóttesc hann allra þeirra
meina á ser kenna fyr ástar sakar við þá.

2. Heilagr Þorlákr neytte svá þess stiórnar-veldess es hónom var gefet
í sínne vígslo, at binda ok leysa af Goðs haolfo ráð manna, at vitrom
maonnom ok rétt-laótom sýndesc iamnt hvárs-tveggja gætt vesa, at þar
fylgðe aldregi oesingr né van-stille; enda vas hann ok10 aldregi í
því svá sloer né linr, þó tor-sótt vere, at eige mætte þat meirr meta
til miúkleiks ok miskunnar, þó at hann biðe margra lenge, ef rétt
virðing vere á. Lét hann ser þat opt í hog koma sem Davíð seger, at
'Dróttenn elskar miskunn ok rétt-læte, en gefr af ser dýrð ok milde.'15

3. Þess es ok at geta, es Þorlákr byscop elskaðe þann stað mest, þegar
es Scála-holt leið, es hann hafðe áðr prýddan með sínne at-vist. Hann
vígðe til ábóta í Vere Goðmund Bialfa son, góðan mann ok réttlátan;
mildan ok metnaðar-lausan. Þorkell Geira son, es fyrr vas geteð
í þesso mále, rézc þar under regulo-hald, ok20 hélt vel meðan hann
lifðe, ok andaðesc á eno nionda áre byscopsdóms Þorláks byscops.

[[106: .16.]]

4. Um daga Þorláks byscops vas í laog leitt at halda heilagt
Ambrosius-dag, ok Ceciliu-dag, ok Agnesar-dag; ok at fasta nátt-faostor
fyrr Postola-messor ok Nicholas-messo. Hann bauð ríkt at halda
Friádaga-faosto, svá at oengan skylde tví-mælt eta rúm-helgan, nema
þann einn es í Pásca-vico es. Hann hélt svá ríkt5 sialfr Friá-daga,
at hann át alldrige [1541] þurt, ef hann vas heill; en hann vas svá
linr ok hoegr í því, þá es hann vas siúkr, at hann át hvítan mat á
Ymbro-daogom ok Friá-daga, ef hann vas þess beðenn, ok gaf þau doeme
þeim maonnom, es nú vilja slíka hlute svá goera, sem vaón es at bazt
same í Goðs auglite. Þorlákr byscop vas siúkr10 í sínom byscopsdóme, þá
es Ióla-dag bar á Friá-dag; ok vas hann þá mátt-lítell, ok bergðe hann
þó kiotve þann dag; ok sýnde þau doeme af ser at svá vas betr goert.

5. Hann lagðe á þat mikla stund, at halda þeim maonnom saman es
teingðer vóro helgom hiúskap; en lagðe þeim maonnom þunga15 hlute á
hendr í fé-giaoldom ok skriftom, es af því brugðo stórom: þótte hónom
sem Goðe moende í því mest mót-goerð, ef þat efter-læte, es hann
hefer mest veitt maonnom þessa heims hluta, ok goert þat, fyr ástar
sakar ok miskunnar sínnar ok girndar mannanna, rétt [1542] ok blezat,
sem haofoð-synð es ellegar, ef þat vas herfelega neist20 ok ranglega
raskat. En þau fé, es menn guldo fyr van-hage sína, lét hann aldrege
koma við aonnor [1543] fé, heldr lagðe hann þau [1544] til þess,
[[107: 16.]] at þau hiú, es vel fóro [1545] saman ok fé-laus vóro,
mætte þá heldr saman vesa an áðr; ok yrðe þeim þat nockvat til skióls
ok yfer-bóta sínna ó-ráða, es féin haofðo láteð.

6. Þorlákr byscop rauf þau raóð aoll á sínom daogom, sem hann visse at
ó-laogom ráðen vesa, hvárt sem hlut aótto í meire menn eðr5 minne. Eige
varð hann við suma haofðingja [1546] með aollo sam-hoga; þvi at hann
samþykðe þat eitt við þá es vel samðe; þótte hónom þat miklo meira
niðr-fall Goðs Cristne ef gaofgom maonnom gaófosc stórer hluter yfer:
virðe hann ok við þá eige meire várkunn, at hepta sik eige at ó-leyfðom
[1547] hlutom, es áðr haofðo bæðe miket lán af10 Goðe í auðræðom
[1548] ok mann-virðingom.

11. 1. Nú es at segja af hvers-dags-haóttom ens sæla Þorláks byscops,
hve iafn-lyndr hann vas í góðom hlutom: hann mælte aldregi þat orð es
eige koeme til nackverrar nyt-semðar, ef hann vas at því sóttr. Hann
vas ok svá varr í sínom15 orðom, at hann lastaðe aldregi veðr, sem
marger goera; ok enga þá hlute es eige vóro lastande, ok hann sá at
efter Goðs vilja fóro [1549]. Hann langaðe til oengra doegra; hann
kvídde ok oengom vilge [1550] miok nema Alþinge ok Imbro-daogom:
af því Alþinge, at hónom þótte margr maðr þar verða villr vega um
sín mála-ferle, sá es20 mikels vas virðr ok hónom þótte miket við
liggja: en af því Imbro-daogom [1551], [[108: 16.]] at hónom þótte
þat ábyrgðar-ráð miket at vígja menn, es til þess sótto langan
veg, ok hann sá þá miok van-foera til, bæðe saker lítels lærdóms
ok annarra hátta ser ú-skapfelldra; en hann nennte þó varla at níta
[1552], bæðe saker fátoekes þeirra sialfra, ok fyr saker þeirra manna
es þeim haofðo kennt eðr sínar iarteiner haofðo5 til sent: en sagðe
hann hverjom þeirra greinelega, hvat hverre vígslo fylgðe til vanda,
ok fal þeim siaolfom ábyrgð á hende ok þeim es þá sendo til [1553].

2. Hann vas svá iafn-lyndr í faostom sínom, þá es hann vas heima,
en í vaokom ok boena-halde, hvárt sem hann vas heima eðr10 eige,
at til ens sama vas ey at ætla. Hann nýtte svá lítt foezlo, at eige
mátte annat glíkara [1554] þickja an hann moende þá optazt [1555]
við skiljazc es hónom þótte mest fyrer. Svá vas hónom um dryck faret,
at aldregi mátte finna, at á hann fenge, þó at hann hefðe þess-kyns
dryck. En hann vas svá dryck-sæll, þá es hann veitte15 vinom sínom
[1556], at þat aol brásc [1557] aldregi es hann blezaðe ok hann signde
sínne hende, þá es gerð skylde koma [1558]. Hann vas svá ú-vand-bloetr
[1559] ok vin-veittr at þeim veizlom es dryckjor vóro [1560], at hann
soemðe við allt þat es soemanda vas ok [1561] eige soemðe ílla. En
þá es Þorlákr byscop drack vatn eðr ú-áfengenn dryck, þá fór hann
svá20 [[108: 16.]] stillelega með, ok (með) svá mikelle bindende, at
hann saup á þriá sopa, eðr fimm, eðr siau, en nálega aldrege [1562]
framarr; hann drack ok nálega aldrege mat-mála í mille ó-siúkr,
ef eige vóro almennings dryckjor [1563].

3. Þorlákr byscop [1564] vas aldrege all-vel heill í sínom
byscopsdóme;5 ok vas þat sem vaón vas, at því sem Póll Postole seger,
at 'Kraft-renn algoeresc af siúk-leiknom.' At-goerðer lét hann lækna
oft hafa at ser við sínne meinseme; ok sýnde þat, at Goð hefer til
setta lækna, at þeir skolo stundom mega, at Dróttens vilja, með
skaommom sárleikom stoeðva laong ó-hoegende.10

4. Þorlákr byscop hafðe skynsamlegan haótt á síno boena-halde frá
því sem flester menn aðrer: hann soeng fyrst Credo ok Pater Noster,
efter þat es hann hafðe signt sik; ok ymna, Jesu Nostra Redemptio; ok
lét þat þegar þar á finna, at hann hugsaðe iamnan til þeirrar lausnar
es Goð hafðe leyst mann-kynet, ... [1565] ok sanna aóst15 við Goð
ok menn; girnð eilífrar sælo, ok sam-vistar við Goð; ótte Dóms-dags,
ok hingat-kváma Skaparans at doema um allt mann-kyn. Þetta allt boðar
þessar Ymne. Þá soeng hann Gregorius-boen á meðan hann klædde sik;
ok þar efter enn fyrsta psalm or Psaltara, ok lét ser aldrege or hog
ganga þau heilræðe es í Psalm-enom20 standa, at 'Sá es sæll es eige
gengr efter ó-raóðom, ok eige samþycker ílla hlute með synðogom, og
eige doemer ranga dóma, [[109: 16.]] ok iamnan geymer Goðs laga.' En
es hann kom til kirkjo, soeng hann fyrst lof Heilagre Þrenningo. Efter
þat lofaðe hann með soengom þá heilaga menn es kirkjan vas vígð, sú es
þá vas hann í, ok þar vóro helger dómar varð-veitter. Síðan las hann
Mário-tíðer; ok efter þat lagðesc hann niðr fyr altare allr til iarðar,
þá es5 eige vas heilagt, ok bað lenge fyrer allre Goðs Cristne. Ok
hvern dag soeng hann þriðiung Psaltara um framm vana-soeng sínn,
hvárt sem hann vas heima eðr eige. Ok soeng fleira miðlom psalma,
an aðrer menn: hann soeng fyrst, Gloria Patri, af Heilagre Þrenning;
þá næst: Miserere mei Deus; þá, Salvum fac Pater et Domine fyr10
aollo Cristno folke. En ef hónom baóro til vanda-maól, soeng hann þat
vers sem Salomon enn Spake bað til Goðs á sínom daogom, Mitte mihi,
Domine, auxilium de Sancto. En es hann geck frá mat-borðe, soeng hann:
Benedicam Dominum in omni tempore. En es hann af-klæddesc til svefns,
soeng hann þann psalm, es Dróttenn15 es minntr á sítt heit at þeir
skyle oerugger vesa es sítt ráð varð-veita réttlega, ok misbióða aoðrom
hvártke í orðom né goerðom. Þesse psalmr es, Domine, quis habitabit
[1566]; ok vas hónom miket ynðe at halda slíkar venjor, ok vætte
[1567] at nockvorr monde efter hans haóttom víkja.20

5. Hann hende [1568] skemtan at saogom ok kvæðom, ok at aollom [[109,
294: 17, 28.]] streng-leikom ok lióð-foerom, ok at hyggenna manna
roeðom ok draumom; ok at aóllo því es góðra manna skemtan vas, útan
leikom; þvi at hónom þótte slíkt dvelja ú-nýtar sýslor vándra manna
[1569].

6. Þorlák byscop dreymðe þann draum á Alþinge, at hann5 þóttesc ganga
frá kirkjo þar á þingeno heim til búðar sínnar, ok bera haofoð ens
heilaga Martini í faðme ser: en Póll prestr af Reykja-holte, dýrðlegr
maðr, réð svá þann draum, at hann sialfr moende þar efter bera heilags
byscops haofoð hvert es hann foere. Ok es nú aollom auð-sýnt, at þat
es satt.10

12. 1.  [1570]Þá es Þorlákr byscop hafðe xv vetr at stóle seteð
í Scála-holte með byscops-tign í biaortom blóma góðrar atferðar,
elskaðr af Goðe ok góðom maonnom; miok moeddr af mót-goerðom manna,
ok þar með af marg-faldre van-heilso, þá lýste hann því leynelega
fyrer nockorom sínom trúnaðar-maonnom,15 at hann moende vilja upp
gefa þann byscopsdóm, ok sagðe þá þurfa at fá styrkvara eyk under
þat ok, sem hann hafðe áðr við genget: en hann vilde sialfr víkja
aftr í Canoca-setr sítt með lítilæte, ok þióna þar Goðe ok helgom
maonnom meðan hann lifðe.

En Allz-valdande Goð es hann hafðe upp hafet á eno hæsto palla20
kenne-mannlegrar tignar, sá þá, at hónom mátte þó endasc til háleitrar
aombonar, þótt eige minkaðesc hans tign í manna auglite; ok lét hann
þat af því eige framm ganga, heldr sá hann hónom [[295: 28.]] þann
viðr-búneng til handa móte síno andláte, sem hverr vitr maðr moende
kiósa ser ok sínom ást-maonnom.

2. Þorlákr byscop fór þann fiórðung síðast yfer es hónom vas nálægaztr;
ok tók í Borgarfirðe þá sótt, es hann leidde til grafar. Hann kom
heim til stóls síns með lítlom mætte, ok lá í reckjo þriá5 maónoðr,
ok hafði iamnan moeðosama sótt, en aldrege harða verke; ok mátte hann
allra hluta svá geyma, sem þá es hann vas heill maðr, þat es mest lá
við, bæðe hónom ok aoðrom. Þá vas komenn at vist í Scála-holt Gizoerr
Hallz son, es bæðe vas vitr ok góð-giarn. Hann kom oft at finna byscop
í hans van-mætte, ok styrkðe10 hann í maorgom fagrlegom doeme-saogom,
fróðlegom ok fá-heyrðom, frá helgom maonnom eðr aoðrom góðom maonnom,
þeim es bazt haofðo boret sín meinlæte í mann-raunom. Marger kvómo þá
ok viner hans ok frændr at finna hann, ok þiggja af hónom heil raóð,
en sýna á hónom fasta aóst með fullom aloga. Póll systor-son15 hans
kom til hans í sóttenne, ok sýnde enn sem fyrr, at hann vas hónom
ástsamastr allra sínna gaofogra frænda.

3. En es miok tók at líða at Þorláki byscope, þá sende hann efter
Þórvalde, syne Gizoerar Hallz sonar, es mann-vit ok minne hafðe í
gnoegsta lage, ok iamnan þótte vel til fallenn at hafa ætlan eða
or-skurðe20 á um þat es miklo varðaðe. Ok es hann kom, þá tiáðe
byscopenn fyr hónom fiár-hage staðarens þá es haofðo veret þá es
hann kom til, ok hverso þá vas komeð, es hann ætlaðe ser eige [[295:
28.]] lengr fiár-forraóð. Hann talðe ok upp fyrer hónom greinelega
fiár-tillaog þau es hann hafðe haft við frændr sína, síðan hann kom
til staðarens forráða; ok hverso hann hafðe þeim til þrifnaðar komet,
hvat sem at saok hafðe. Ok es þeir saó þat, at staðrenn hafðe miok
hoegsc til forráða, ok auðgasc at fé, en þeim vas maorgom fé-fátt es5
hónom vóro náner at frændseme, þá goedde hann enn, með ráðe Þórvallz
ok annarra vina sínna, frændr sína með fiár-tillaogom.

4. Hann lýste þvi, at hann vilde klæðnat sínn gefa kenne-maonnom;
en þann es fé-mestr vas, gaf hann byscope þeim es efter sik koeme;
ok vilde hann þat eige ákveðom leiða, hverr sá moende10 vesa: annan
klæðnat allan gaf hann prestom ok aoðrom clercom; en fátoekom maonnom
þann es fé-minztr vas; þvi at hann lét þá aldrege hiá sitja þá es
hann skifte giaofom með vinom sínom; vas hónom ok þá ynðe at því
hve maorg hundroð hann hafðe gefet á hverjom misserom, en maorgom
skip-pundom mat. Brande15 byscope at Hólom gaf hann fingr-goll:
en þat fingr-goll, sem hann sialfr hafðe boret daglega ser á hende,
gaf hann Póle systor-syne sínom; ok vas þat vígt; ok virðo þat marger
vesa fyrir-spaó hans tignar þeirrar sem efter kom. En sú auðna vas
á því þegar, sem nú undrasc einge, at hverr þóttesc nockot gótt af
hlióta, es þær20 minjar hafðe, es hann hafðe átt.

5. Þorlákr byscop roedde greinelega aoll leyndar-maól fyrer Þórvalde,
áðr þeir skilðosc, þau es hónom maótto nauðsynleg þyckja, sum til
leyndar, en sum til upp-burðar efter sínn dag.

[[296: 29.]]

6. Siau nóttom fyrer andlát sítt kallaðe byscop saman lærða menn, ok
lét olea sik. Ok áðr hann være smurðr, mælte hann miok langt oerende;
en þó vas hónom málet þungt ok ervitt.

'Ek lá fyrr í reckjo,' sagðe hann, 'með lítlom mætte, ok vas-ek þá
oleaðr í þeirre sótt: ok es þar vas komeð saongvenom sem nú5 es, þá
mælta-ek svá fyrer, at aller þeir menn, sem í mínom stór-mælom være,
skylde frialser vesa mínna um-mæla ef mik toeke frá: ætlaða-ek þeim
þat til líknar; en mer eige til áfallz dóms siaolfom. [1571] En mer
vas þat svá launat, at þeir sem eige vildo foera á-leiðis fyrer mer,
saogðo þá siá mega, hvárt ek þóttomc of-fare veret hafa10 í mínom
um-mælom, es ek vilda þá aollom lina efter mítt líf-lát. En ek mon
nú raun til gera, hvárt heldr hefer veret: skoloð ér nú þau mín
um-mæle heyra ok frá bera, at ek vil at aoll um-mæle mín sé en saomo
ok stríð-mæle, nema þeir sættesc við þá menn sem ek hefe til fenget
mín maól at leysa; ok lofa-ek oenga lausn aðra an15 þá sem ek hefer
áðr til lagt; ella bíðe þeir þess byscops es efter mik koemr til.'

7. En es hann hafðe þetta mælt, þá hvílðesc hann fyrst, ok síðan
talaðe hann til þeirra manna es við vóro stadder: 'Ek vil biðja yðr,'
sagðe hann, 'at ér fyrer-láteð mer þat, es ek hefe svá20 goert at yðr
hefer eige vel þótt.' Aller svaoroðo þeir es við vóro, at eingis mætte
þeir hann kunna, en vildo þó giarnsamlega veita hónom þat es hann
beidde. Þá mælte Gizoerr Hallz son fyrer allra [[297: 29.]] þeirra
haond--sá es at aollo vas bazt til fallenn--'Vér biðjom yðr, herra, at
ér fyrer-gefit oss þat es vær haofom mis-mælt eða mis-goert við yðr,
es vær erom hrædder um, at bæðe sé mart ok stórt.' Enn sæle Þorlákr
byscop iáttaðe því blíðlega. Þá mælte Gizoerr annat sinn þat oerende,
at nú má auð-sýnt vesa, at Heilagr ande hefer5 mælt með hónom: 'Þess
biðjom vér yðr, herra,' sagðe hann, 'þó at ér skilesc nu sýnelega
við oss at líkam-legre sam-vist: veseð oss andlegr faðer, ok árnande
miskonnar við Almátkan Goð, þvi at vær trúom því, at ér monoð eige
minna hafa vald í andlego lífe með Goðe, an nú hafeð ér.' En hann
þagðe þá, ok svaraðe oengo;10 ok es nú auð-sýnt hví hann goerðe svá,
þvi at nú veiter hann aollom þat sem hann vas þá beðenn; en vilde
þó eige bert goera fyrer líti-lætis sakar, at hann sam-þyktesc við
at hann moende til þess foerr vesa. Goerðe hann þetta at efter-doeme
Goðs sonar, es hann sam-þyckte þat sumt þegjande sem satt vas, efter
því sem helger15 menn segja. En es þeir haofðo þetta mælt, þá feck
þeim svá mikels, es við vóro stadder, at fáer maótto vatne halda.

8. En es herra byscop sá þat [1572], þá mælte hann: 'Láteð yðr þat eige
mikels fá þó at skile órar sam-vistor. Ek hefe vereð alla gaoto lítill
skaorungr, ok til lítils foerr, ef eige hefðe aðrer menn mik20 studdan;
því es yðr eige skaðe at mer; ferr ek ok efter mínom forlaogom: en
sá mon koma efter mik, es mikell skaorungr mun. Vil ek yðr ok í því
hugga, at ek vænter, at Goð mun mik eige [[297: 30.]] helvítis-mann
doema.' Síðan mintesc hann til allra kenne-manna, ok þeirra annarra
sem hiá hónom vóro, ok gaf þeim aollom blezan sína. Efter þat vas
hann oleaðr til lykta; en síðan vilde hann ecki tala nema þat es
hónom þótte mest nauðsyn á; en iamnan [1573] þá es hann mátte, þá
hroerðosc varrarnar til boena-haldzens5 meðan hann lifðe.

9. Þá es siau nætr vóro liðnar frá því es enn sæle Þorlákr byscop
vas oleaðr, þá beiddesc hann snemma þess dags klæða-skiptess. Þá
geck at hónom Ormr prestr Eyjolfs son, capalin hans, ok mælte: 'Oss
þycker ábyrgð í at hroera yðr, herra, svá miok,10 með svá lítlom
mætte sem ér eroð. Eða vilet ér or þessom klæðom foerðer vesa,
ef ér verðet skamm-lífer?' Byscop svarar: 'Vel mun duga at hroera
mik; en af smurningenne vænter-ek mer miskunnar af Goðe, en ecki af
klæðom þessom.' Vóro hónom þá fengen aonnor klæðe [1574], ok endesc
þat vel sem hann hafðe sagt. Eige saó15 menn at svá stórom toeke af
mætte hans (þann dag) sem vas reyndar; af þvi at þá hélt hann enn
aollom haóttom sínom góðom enom saomom sem þangat til haofðo veret,
þótt megnet være lítit, þá vas hugar-faret þó stað-fast sem áðr. En
es nockot kveldaðe þann dag, þá tók miok at hónom at líða; ok es
aptan-soengve vas20 loket, þá þótte síga á hann ómegen nockot; ok es
hann hóf upp augon, þá mælte hann: 'Hvert fóroð ér Þórkell nú?' Virðe
[[298: 30.]] Gizoerr Hallz son svá, at því sýndesc Þórkell byscope
við andlát sítt, at hann hafðe berlegazt spanðan hann frá vándo.

10. En es Þorlákr byscop vas at andláte komenn, þá beiddesc hann
at drecka; ok es hann vilde til víkjasc, þá hné [1575] hann at
hoegendonom, ok sofnaðe soetlega til Goðs; ok veitte Goð hónom5 þá
dýrð, at hann skylde þyrsta við sítt andlát sem sialfan Goðs son;
ok skylde hvárskis þorste fyrr stoeðvasc an í ó-endelego [1576]
lífe, því er Goðs syner [1577] ero iamnan þyrster til. Auðsýnelegt
lét Goð þat vesa í andláte ens sæla Þorláks byscops, at hann emnde
[1578] þat þá, es hann sagðe fyre munn Dávíðs, at 'Dýrðlegr moende
vesa í Goðs10 auglite dauðe heilagra manna hans.' Ok þó at þat være
þá enn leynt fyre maonnom, at þau [1579] emne være um ráð (byscops),
sem nú ero vitoð, þá þótte oengom manne efter því hiá hónom at vesa
sem hiá aoðrom maonnom aondoðom, heldr þótte flestom betra hiá hans
líke at vesa, an hiá aoðrom maonnom lifondom.15

13. 1. Þeir hluter urðo efter andlát Þorláks byscops, es þeim maonnom
þótte mikels um vert es við vóro stadder ok saó; en því saogðo þeir
faóm maonnom frá í fyrsto, at þeir vænto at Goð moende (þat) enn
framar birta an þá sýndesc. Sá vas einn hlutr, at litr hans vas miklo
biartare ok þeckelegre an annarra20 andaðra manna: sá vas annarr, at
svá vóro siáldren biaort í augom hans langa stund efter andlát hans
sem lifanda mannz þess sem [[299: 31.]] skygn es: sá vas enn þriðe
hlutr, at saór vóro maorg fallen á haorund hans bæðe smaó ok stór,
en aoll vóro þau gróen es til vas leitað; ok þótte þá þegar mikels um
vert þeim es visso; en nú undrasc einge þótt svá hafe orðet. Þá vas
dúkr breiddr yfer andlit hónom; ok es Gizoerr kom til, mælte hann:
'Láte oss siá faoðor5 várn.' Vas þá af tekenn dúkrenn. En es hann sá
í andlit hans, þótte hónom því meira um vert hverja þeckt es bauð,
sem hann kunne goerst at siá. Efter þat vas búet um líkama Þorláks
byscops vandlega, ok skoret hár hans; ok hafa menn af þeim helgom
dóm mikla fró.10

2. Hann andaðesc Fimta dag vico heldr síð dags, einne nátt fyre
atfangs dag Ióla [1580]. Þá vas hann sex-toegr at aldre, ok hafðe
xv vetr byscop veret. Þá vas liðet frá Hingað-burðe Várs Herra Jesu
Christi mclxxx ok vj [1581] vetr.

14. 1. Um morgonenn efter vas lík Þorláks byscops boret í15 kirkjo,
ok stóð uppe í saong-húse ij [1582] nætr at bíða graftar. En annan
dag Ióla vas hann í iaorð lagiðr; vas þar við staddr Póll diacn,
frænde hans, es byscop varð efter hann; ok aller lærðer menn es
í naónd vóro. Þar kom þá ok lík þess fátoeks mannz es byscop hafðe
teket af válaðe, ok veitt til dauða-dags:20 sá hafðe lík-þrárr veret;
ok vilde Goð þá sýna þar þat [[299: 31.]] milde-verk sem eitt vas af
maorgom þeim es hann goerðe fyre Goðs saker í síno lífe.

2. En áðr menn genge frá greftre ens sæla Þorláks byscops, þá mælte
Gizoerr Hallz son langt oerende ok fagrt um þau tíðende es þar haofðo
goerzc, efter því sem siðr es til yfer tigenna manna5 greftre. Ok
vil-ek geta nockorra orða hans [1583] þeirra es hann talaðe, ok mer
ganga sízt or minne: hann tiáðe þat fyrst fyre þeim hverr nytja-maðr
hann hafðe veret staðnom ok aollo landz-folkeno. Efter þat mælte
hann svá:

3.  [1584]'Ek hefe her vereð nockorom sinnom staddr, þá es þau10
tíðende hafa goerzc es þessom ero glík: fimm byscopar hafa her vereð
niðr setter at mer hiá vesanda; fyrst Þorlákr byscop Rúnolfs son; þá
Ketill byscop; en síðan Magnús byscop; efter þat Kloengr byscop; en nú
Þorlákr byscop. Ek hefer ok talat nockor orð, þá (es) þesser atburðer
hafa goerzc sem siðvenja es til í15 aoðrom laondom yfer tigenna manna
greftre. En mála-efne hafa veret iamnan stórlega góð; þvi at þeir
hafa aller veret ener mesto merkis-menn í sínom byscopsdóme: ok es
gótt á þat at minnasc, at várre grein, ok at saogn várra forellra um
þá byscopa es her hafa veret fyrer óra daga, ok á órom daogom, at sá
þycker hverjom20 baztr, sem kunnaztr es. En svá dýrðleger menn sem þeir
hafa vereð aller, þá es þat þó eitt sér, hverso Þorlákr hefer sik til
búet byscops tignar langt frá því sem aller aðrer: hann varð-veitte sik
[[300: 31.]] í hrein-lífe alla æve; ok sýndesc hann allan sínn alldr
lastvarlega lifa með lítilæte ok allz-háttar ráðvende. Hann vas vígðr
þegar á barns-aldre enom smærom vígslom hverja efter aðra, þar til at
hann vas prestr sem fyrst þótte mega fyr alldrs sakar. En es hann vas
prestr, þá gafsc hann Almaótkom Goðe under reglo-hald, ok5 vas hann
þá vígðr til canoca; efter þat til priors; en síðan til ábóta. Nú má
siá hverso virzc hefer yfer-boðonom, ok enom vitroztom maonnom þeim es
bazta for-siaó kunno, at vígja hann aollom vígslom þeim es til laógo;
þvi at svá varð-veitte hann vel hvern vígslo-pallenn, at enge þótte
annarr til an auka hans vígslor10 æ meðan þær vóro til. En vær vættom
[1585] þó meðr Goðs miskunn at nú skyle hans tign hafa mest aukezc,
sem hann es frá oss kallaðr til eilífrar sælo ok dýrðar með Goðe. En
svá kunner sem oss ero marger hans góðer siðer, þá mego vær treglega
at oss geta, at goera efter því sem boðet es, at vér skylem á engiss
mannz ráð15 gloeggva dóma leggja. En svá miket traust haofom ver á
hans verðleikom, at ek ugge, at fáer mone vánar-menn vesa ef hann es
eigi full-sæll, svá sem ver vitom hann ó-glíkastan veret hafa aollom
maonnom aoðrom í síno góðlífe.'

Maorg orð aonnor vitrleg talaðe Gizoerr í síno mále, en enge20 þau at
meirr hafe sýnt hans speke ok rétt-sýne, an þesse sem nú vóro saogð,
ok raun es á orðen.

[[300, 127: 31, 1.]]

15. 1. Morg tíðende urðo á þeim fimtán vetrom, es Þorlákr vas byscop
í Scála-holte, í andláte ríkra manna. Þá andaðesc Erlingr iarl,
ok Magnús konongr, son hans; Valdemarr konongr; Heinrekr Englannz
konongr; Eirikr iarl; Eysteinn erki-byscop. Þá varð ok orrosta á
Ílo-vaollom ... [1586]5

2. Þesser dó Íslenzker menn: Biaorn ábóte frá Þver-aó; Káre
ábóte; Ogmundr ábóte; Hallr ábóte; ok marger aðrer kenne-menn ok
virðinga-menn, bæðe her á lande ok annars-staðar.

Staðar-mennener ok lannz-folket víða haormoðo miok andlát ens sæla
Þorláks byscops, þvi at þeir ætloðo hann meirr skilðan við10 mennena an
nú er reynt, þvi at aldri hafðe upp komet helge né iarteiner nockors
mannz á Íslande [fyr] an Þorláks byscops, en þó vóro marger menn
huggaðer af þeckilegom draumom, þar til es Guð birte verðleika hans
framar. En þó stóð til mikels hallæres ok áfelles, byscopenn einn í
landeno, ok þó af-gamall; en þá hófsc15 ó-friðr Norðanlannz. [1587]





The Story of Bishop Thorlac.

1. 1. In the days when pope Anacletus [II] ruled God's Christendom, and
Magnus Sigurd's son and Harold Gille[-christ] were kings of Norway,
there was born in a part of Iceland that is called Fleet-lithe,
Thor-lac the holy, at the farm that is called Lithe-end, in the year
when bishop Thor-lac Runolf's son died [1133].

2. Their names were the same, not because he was called after bishop
Thor-lac, but rather because He, that knoweth and governeth all
things, wished to do honour withal to the former bishop Thor-lac,
that his name might be ever loved and worshipped by all them that
have since been permitted to hear and know the worth of the blessed
bishop Thor-lac. And Almighty God has vouchsafed to the blessed
bishop's name that honour, which Solomon the Sage said aforetime that
'a good name is better than much riches' [Prov. xxii. 1], and that
was truly a good name then, since it was hallowed by holy baptism
and afterwards blessed by the bishoply honour. The proverb is proved
true that 'a wise man's words will come to pass,' for this name hath
now become better than much gold to them that call on him in their
need. And this which holy writ saith in another place, that 'better
is a good name than precious ointment' [Eccles. vulg. vii. 2], hath
come true no whit less in this matter, inasmuch as it is now often
proven by trial that sickness is ofttimes speedily cured by calling
upon his name, that could never be healed before by any ointment or
any of the medicines that had been taken or tried before.

2. 1. The father of Thor-lac was Thor-hall, and his mother Halla. They
were well thought of and of good parts. He was a merchantman before he
set up housekeeping, and she was a thrifty and thoughtful woman. They
were both of good family, and come of gentle kin. And it is now
made manifest that God hath fairly fulfilled to us that which he
promised by the mouth of David the prophet, that 'the generation of
the righteous shall be blessed' [Ps. vulg. cxi. 2], and it is manifest
that this hath now been fairly fulfilled and shown forth in the life
of the blessed bishop Thor-lac. The nearest kinsfolk of Thor-lac
were upright and honest of life; of calls upon them they had many,
but of means not enough. Thor-lac was yet young in years when they
broke up their household, his father and mother.

2. He was unlike most young men in bringing up, gentle and genial
in all things, obedient and obliging to every one, silent and
self-restrained in all his ways, clever and quick at learning even in
his young years. He got the psalter by heart before the household
of his father and mother were parted; but he had little other
book-learning at first, nevertheless he was already so thoughtful in
his young years that many wise men noticed it. But although he had
not much learning as a child, yet in all his ways it looked as if
he had well-nigh learnt all that which might make him a better man
than before. He never set his mind on play or vain pleasures, he was
easy and even-tempered, and early made it manifest in his conversation
that he meant to take to heart those wholesome admonitions which David
teacheth in the psalter, that a man should 'turn from evil and do good,
seek peace, and pursue it' [Ps. vulg. xxxiii. 15].

3. 1. When his mother saw from his wisdom, by God's providence, how
goodly a clerk Thor-lac might become through his good conversation, if
only he could get on with his learning, then his mother and he betook
themselves to the highest chief-place in Ord under the hands of priest
Eyjolf, Sæ-mund's son, who had both great chiefship and good learning,
goodness and wisdom in greater measure than most other men. And we
have heard the blessed Thor-lac bear this witness of him--that he had
hardly ever found a man so good as he was, and he made it to be seen
afterwards that he would not let those wholesome admonitions with
respect to his master pass by him, which the blessed apostle Paul
gave to his disciples, when he spake thus to them that heard him,
'Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ' [1 Cor. xi. 1]. Insomuch
that it often happened when we were praising his good conversation
that he would say, 'those were the ways of Eyjolf Sæ-mund's son,'
his foster-father. And he did right in this to give him such honour
in his speech, for he had him to thank for this.

2. Eyjolf prized Thor-lac most of all his disciples, in all that
pertained to clerkship, because he could see from his wisdom and
behaviour, as was afterwards proved indeed, that he would surpass
them all in these things, as is told later.

3. Thor-lac took orders already in his youth, as far as becoming
deacon, at the hands of bishop Magnus, and he was fifteen years old
when that bishop died. And his orders were taken so soon, because his
superiors perceived that he took to heart himself, and observed to
the utmost the duties that are required of each order of those that
he took. And his learning and his orders did not proceed so fast,
but that he forestalled with regular application all those qualities
which are needed by those orders. He took to heart, when his learning
was lighter and his orders lesser, what bishop Isidore spake, a wise
and holy man, that 'it is profitable both to learn much and to live
uprightly, but if a man may not do both, then it is more blessed to
live well.' He also observed, that though the lesser orders rather
brought with them lowliness and service than great honour of worldly
esteem, yet he kept all those qualities which the smaller offices
required after he was raised to the higher degrees of office and
honour by [taking] the greater orders.

4. It was his habit when he was young in years to keep long hours at
his book and to be oftentimes writing, but betweenwhiles he would be
at his prayers, and when he had no task in hand, he would learn what
his mother could teach him--genealogies and stories of great men.

4. 1. When bishop Magnus was dead for some time there was no bishop at
Scal-holt, and there came to be a lack of clerks. It was then men's
advice that bishop Beorn should be asked to hold consecrations at
the All-moot, and he listened to their prayer, and it was then that
Thor-lac was ordained priest and many other clerks with him. But
when he was a priest and himself took up the rule and maintenance of
the offices [of the church], it was then speedily made manifest how
careful and considerate he would be about the hours or services,
and all else that was required of him in those orders which he
had then taken. Moreover he persevered in the same lowliness of
life as before, and took upon himself when the first six months
were past a small paid cure or business, and held it somewhile,
and it turned out well both as regards money and good report, so
that well-nigh every child that was about him loved him. And many
good ensamples shown forth have made manifest in the blessed bishop
Thor-lac what hath seldom been apparent in many other men, to wit,
that he was both young and old at once, young of years and old of
wit. Moreover he was clad about with many good qualities, and most
of all with them of which David saith that clerks lay in most need,
to wit, that they should 'be clothed with salvation and judgment'
[Ps. vulg. cxxxii. 9], and this he showed forth afterwards in all his
life, so that whatever he had to do went well-nigh never amiss to him,
and all they that were about him profited thereby.

2. But when this had gone on for some time, and he was now well
furnished with money, he was minded to go abroad, for he wished
to see the ways of other good men, and he journeyed from Iceland;
but there is nothing told of his journeys until he came to Paris,
and was there at school as long as he thought needful to get the
knowledge which he wished to get there. Thence he came to England,
and was at Lincoln, and there he gat moreover great knowledge,
and fraught with blessings both to himself and others. And now he
had much more good to put forth in his teaching than he had before,
for before he was hardly so well stocked with knowledge as he was now.

3. But when he had been six years [c. 1155-61] out of Iceland, then
he went back to his kindred and his foster-land, and his kinsmen and
his foster-brethren welcomed him back and all his loving friends, but
especially his mother and sisters, for they had the greatest longing
for him, and they would have suffered most if ought had happened to
prevent his return.

4. His mother was with him continually after he came back from abroad,
and he gave a loving maintenance to his two sisters, Ragn-eid the
mother of Paul, who was afterwards bishop after bishop Thor-lac, and
Ey-wara, and he had a very long trial by reason of their conversation,
which was not after his mind. Nevertheless it all came to a good
ending at the last by the mercy of God and by the good mediation of
them that were concerned and their own good will.

5. He showed the same lowliness or more when he came back from his
journeying abroad as he had done before, for he had not brought back
with him any show or worldly glory as many other men do who bring
back less profit and good fortune from their journey than he had
done. It is also the wont of many that they array themselves more
finely in weapons and wear when they come home from their journeys,
for they get a greater choice of such things abroad than they have
had the chance of before. But Thor-lac kept, as the fruits of his
journeying, learning and lowliness and many good habits, which he
perceived in many good men abroad in his journeys, bishops and other
learned and righteous men that came most near to them that lived in
that age when God's Christendom first arose and [those by whom it]
afterwards waxed great.

6. Thor-lac was with his kinsfolk some winters at this time, and had
a very good livelihood withal, and many wise men that were about him
saw that he was still better endowed in many great and good qualities
that were of much moment than he was before he went abroad.

7. But after no long time had passed Thor-lac's kinsmen urged him
to establish his condition somewhat more firmly than it was then,
and especially they wished him to take a wife. They thought that
they could see that he was a thrifty man, and a good householder in
every way. But God's Christendom had long grown strong and mighty,
and the discipline of clerks had increased by reason of restrictions,
albeit it was not at that time greatly censured by his superiors if a
priest took a widow to wife, though it is now forbidden. And at that
time those women in that part of the country who were thought to be
the best matches were widows. And Thor-lac, having been egged on to
take this counsel, went forth with his kinsmen to the homestead that
is named Have, meaning to ask for the hand of the worshipful widow
that lived there, and they were received there with a very good
will. But when they fell asleep after good cheer that same night,
there appeared unto Thor-lac in a dream a man of a noble countenance
and seemly raiment, saying, 'What was your errand hither if ye might
get it sped?' Thor-lac answered, 'I do not know what it will be,' says
he. Then he that appeared unto him in the dream spake. 'I know well,'
said he, 'that thou hast in mind to ask to wife the lady here; but
do thou not open this matter, because it shall not speed, and there
is another bride much higher in store for thee, and thou shalt take
none other to thee but her.' And when he had said this he disappeared
out of sight; but Thor-lac awoke, and he was now so turned away from
the business [he was come on] that he never would ask for any woman's
hand. They went away, and he and the lady were good friends all their
lives after. But his kinsmen thought it somewhat strange that he should
be so changeable in this matter before they knew what had happened,
but when they knew it then they were all content. After all this that
had happened his heart was nevertheless not kindled to pride, though
it had been manifested to him by God in a vision that he meant him
for another end than that which his kinsmen had made out for him and
he himself set his mind to: but rather he exercised himself ever the
more in lowliness, according to the example of all the best men, that
have been ever the more lowly of heart as they have gone up higher
in God's sight, according to the wholesome admonition of Almighty
God, when he speaketh thus, 'Whosoever is lowly he shall be exalted'
[Matt. xxiii. 12], and 'Take example by me, for I am meek and lowly
of heart, and ye shall find rest for your souls' [Matt. xi. 29]. And
when he had not long gone on in this way it was shown forth speedily
what he had set his heart upon.



5. 1. In those days there ruled over that homestead in Side that is
called Kirkby, a noble clerk whose name was Bearn-hedin, and he was a
most worshipful man according to the judgment of all people. He was
a wise man and well favoured, free-handed and of very fair speech,
lenient, and well learned. And when they came to hear of each other, he
and Thor-lac, then each of them yearned for communion with the other;
and God, who is wont to grant righteous men their lawful desires,
granted it to them, and Thor-lac went over to stay at Kirkby, and
he was there six winters together, and they got experience there
of what God saith, namely, 'My yoke is easy and my burden is light'
[Matt. xi. 30].

2. And this was both because a strong pair of yoke-fellows were put
under the yoke, and also it was a light draught for them, because they
took upon themselves to bear well-nigh all the cares of all the people
that dwelt in that country-side near them. And they dealt so with them
that were in their charge as to take off the heavy burdens that had
been laid upon them by offences and evil-speaking against God and good
men and by indulgence to the Fiend, and lay upon them instead God's
burdens light and lenient with gentle shrifts and easy penances. They
fitted to themselves in a mark-worthy way the names which Almighty God
[gives to his servants when he] calls his apostles 'the light of the
world' [Matt. v. 14], inasmuch as they shed a light upon the path of
mercy that leadeth to everlasting joy, both by their noble teaching
in words and in their precious examples. It might be seen by their
daily conversation that that was seldom out of their mind which God
spake to his disciples: 'Let your light so shine before men,' he said,
'that they may learn your good works, and glorify your Father which
is in heaven' [Matt. v. 16]. And it appeared to them that were with
them that there was well-nigh no hour but somewhat good might not
be gleaned from them. They were moreover so set together in like
behaviour and likemindedness towards good, as Luke saith of God's
apostles, that it might be thought they 'had but one heart and one
soul' [Acts iv. 32]. So that it spread abroad over the country-side
how unlike they were to most men in their behaviour. And now it began
to be the common speech of wise men that there would be no more likely
quarter to look towards than that where they were, if a man were ever
needed for the highest office in Iceland, and this was not misjudged,
as was proved later.



6. 1. The owner of the second best homestead in that country, which
was named Thick-by, was a man named Thor-kell the son of Geire,
a wealthy man of possessions and wise of understanding. And when he
began to be stricken somewhat in years, and had no very near kinsman
to take the heritage after him, then he gave a comfortable portion to
his kinsfolk, and kept free for himself at his own disposal what was
left, a great and fair estate. And then he declared that he wished to
choose Christ and his saints as heirs of all that was left, and that
he wished to raise up a seat for canons in Thick-by. Howbeit this
matter was hard to put into effect at first, wherefore he sought
at first to get hold of that which was the hardest to get--a man
that might establish the rule which they, that wished to turn to a
pure life there, were to keep. And now he went to Kirk-by and called
on Thor-lac to undertake it. And he was not very hard to persuade,
because he had already had it in his heart to put off the world and
come under rule [i. e. be canon or monk], according to the words of
Almighty God when he declareth that 'no man can be wholly his disciple
save he forsake all that he hath for God's sake, and serveth him
afterward with a pure heart' [Matt. xix. 21]. Nevertheless he opened
the matter to Bearn-hedin the priest, asking him how he looked on it,
or what appeared to him best to do, whether he should consent to take
up the office to which he was called. But Bearn-hedin said that it
would be a heavy day for him when Thor-lac left Kirk-by; but yet he
said that he could not find it in him to hinder him much therefrom,
because he saw that the salvation of many folk hung upon it. And so
there was an endowment made at Thick-by by the counsel and advice
of bishop Clong and all the men of the hundred, and Thor-lac moved
thither, and there was established a House of Canons [regular].

2. But that day when Thor-lac went forth at the last out of Kirk-by,
the whole of the people accompanied him out of the garth, and they
felt it grievously to part with him. And when Bearn-hedin came home
again, entering the hall, he looked at Thor-lac's seat, and spake with
great earnestness, saying, that that was a seat that would never be
so well filled again unless he himself sat there again. And it was
Thor-lac's wont to say all his life after, which was a great credit
to the estate and to them that held it, that he had never been so
happy before as he was those six winters he was at Kirk-by. Many great
commendations have fallen to this place, but this was the greatest,
for it may most likely be believed that that must have been a good
place above others which he esteemed the best.

3. Thor-lac was full thirty-five years old [1168] when he moved to Wer,
and there he was seven winters. He first took the orders of a canon,
and then was the first prior set over the canons that were there, and
he ordered their life so fairly, that it was the verdict of wise men
that they had nowhere seen such a good way of life, where there had
been a regular [canonical] life established, so short a time as there.

4. And after that bishop Clong hallowed Thor-lac as abbot of Wer,
and then he began afresh to rule in a wonderful way over the brethren
whom he was set over. He bade them to maintain love and unity among
themselves, and laid before them how great gain there was therein,
seeing what the Son of God saith that 'wheresoever two or three
should be gathered in His name, he would be in the midst of them'
[Matt. xviii. 20]. Above all he was most zealous on their behalf,
and they were well cared for in every way.

5. Halla, Thor-lac's mother, was with him all his life, as long as she
was alive, but he had given both his sisters their portions before
he entered upon the regular life. He was loving to all his kinsfolk
afterward as before, and a ghostly father to all them that he was set
over. He forbade the brethren roaming abroad, and every journey for
which there was no necessity, and bade them to be steadfast in good
works at their duties, according to the teaching of the apostle Paul
in his epistle [1 Thess. v. 17, 18], 'Pray without ceasing,' saith he,
'and give God thanks in all things.' Moreover the Son of God himself
saith, 'Holpen is he that is steadfast in good deeds even unto the end
of his life' [Matt. xxiv. 13]. He bade them to keep strict silence,
when it was required, but to hold good conversation when speech was
allowed them, for according to the words of the apostle Paul, 'Evil
communications,' saith he, 'corrupt good manners' [1 Cor. xv. 33]. And
it must be manifest how needful it is in this [course of] life to
keep oneself from worldly and wicked words, if it even be wrong to
speak good words when it is enjoined that there be silence, as David
saith in the Psalter [Ps. vulg. xxxviii. 3], 'I am lowly,' saith he,
'and I kept silence even in a good matter.' He thought himself a
lowly man because he was ever more ready to speak good than evil,
but yet he often refrained from both for God's sake.

6. Men used to go to this house of Canons of abbot Thor-lac from
other minsters and houses of regulars, both men of this land and
aliens, to see and copy the good customs there, and every one that
went there bore witness that they had never been to any place where
there was such a fair life led as there according to the ordinances
of Thor-lac. And then for the first time many men perceived that
there was great good to be looked for where he was by reason of his
holy life, beyond what could be worked by other men. Many men went
away whole from his presence when he had given them his blessing and
chanted over them, that had come with divers ailments to him.

7. Many things also took place about him, which many men at once took
to be miracles. This thing came to pass when he was at ... to wit,
that fire broke out in the house, but as soon as Thor-lac came up and
blessed it the fire was quenched. If any live stock fell sick, they
always began to mend as soon as he had chanted over them, if there were
any life in them. His hallowing of water was mark-worthy insomuch that
both men and cattle gat amendment [of their ills] thereby. If water,
that Thor-lac had hallowed, was sprinkled over cattle, then well-nigh
never did they take harm by sickness, or weather, or wild beasts. If
mice were doing any harm to meat or clothes, there would arise a
plague among them, or they would all disappear before the water if
it were sprinkled about, and if all were done as he gave orders. This
holy water soon got to be taken about over all the neighbourhood, and,
after Thor-lac was bishop, over all Iceland, for everywhere men thought
that they could perceive they got good thereby in that wherein they
were in most need. Nevertheless wise men walked warily with regard to
those things, whether it were in calling these things plain miracles
or in interpreting it as [proceeding from] his particular sanctity,
for so saith Holy Writ, 'Thou shalt not praise a man in his lifetime,
praise him after his life and magnify him according to the reward
of his life' [cp. Eccl. iv. 2], and this was spoken to this end,
that it may lead to assurance, both in them that speak before the
end of a man's life is known to the full, and it may also be that
such speech may entice the heart of the man himself into something
of pride. And it is now made manifest how well it hath turned out
that men followed these wholesome admonitions in this case, namely,
in there being few that praised him overmuch in his life. But now do
ye praise and make much of him in every way that ye be able, for ye
know his worth and his saintliness!



7. 1. Now when the behaviour and life of the holy Thor-lac was shining
with such bloom of purity and goodness of life, and seemly prudence
with regard to the lives of others as hath but now been told, Almighty
God began to prepare the way for that which he already intended,
namely, that his honour might be strengthened and increase beyond
what it then was. And it came about in this way--

2. When bishop Clong was getting far stricken in years, he took a great
illness, so that his feet broke out into sores, and he became very
unable to do his office by reason of his illness. And he had already
gotten leave of archbishop Ey-stan for this, to have a man chosen to
be bishop after him. Wherefore bishop Clong went to the All-moot and
required of his friends that a man should be chosen to go abroad [to
be hallowed bishop], and meetings were appointed therefore. That same
summer, as if he had been sent thither by God, abbot Thor-lac came to
the All-moot upon some business which he thought needful to do there,
for he was never wont to leave home save it were for some business
that needed it. When the discourse began about this matter, there
were three more named for choice to be made from, who were thought
to be best fitted therefore of all men. And one of them was abbot
Thor-lac; the second abbot was named Ogmund, a paragon of men. The
third was a priest named Paul, a man of great learning and a very
great householder. There was fair testimony borne to each of them,
and every one was most eager that he whom he happened to know best
should be chosen. But this was made known in Thor-lac's case that he
had not puffed himself up with that pride that is called self-conceit,
and that he showed forth his good works in the face of God rather than
of men, and strove rather to be better than other men in righteousness
than merely to seem so before the eyes of foolish men. And therefore
it was, that to many he seemed to be the least known of those which the
choice was to be made from. And this was to be excused, because he had
not been a very near neighbour to many folk as far as his country and
his dwelling-place went. Thor-lac was of few words at these meetings,
but many others, who had much less to do with the matter than he,
were wordy enough. It was inquired of Thor-kel Geireson, who was well
approved for his truthfulness, and who of all wise and noble men was
best acquainted with Thor-lac, what were Thor-lac's gifts, and whether
he was a good speaker. But Thor-kel answered, 'Thor-lac takes pains
rather to do best than speak most.' This answer was to men's liking,
and many straightway began to favour Thor-lac the more heartily,
when they heard such worthy witness borne to his qualities by such a
wise man and one of such judgment. The end of the matter was, that the
choice was given to bishop Clong to choose one of them that had been
picked out: and he chose Thor-lac to go out and to take his bishopric
after him, and all the duties that appertained thereto. On Peter's
mass-day [June 29, 1174] bishop Clong chose Thor-lac to be bishop,
and he wished straightway to hand over to him all the governance of the
estates. But when the choice had fallen upon the holy abbot Thor-lac,
he said that it had come upon him unawares, and declared that he
had not refused to be one of them picked out, but other men whom he
declared to be best fitted to the office might have less inducement
to excuse themselves [from standing]. He excused himself much, and
said that he himself was not at all well fitted to this office and
dignity. But he could say nought that availed against the appeal
and eagerness of the people, and all the more as he suspected even
then that it was God's will, as indeed afterwards it proved to be,
wherefore he at last consented to the choice that was made.

3. The lord abbot Thor-lac went back from the Moot to his house of
Canons, and prayed bishop Clong that he would keep the governance of
the see and of the estate till the next season or the winter over. And
at that time the estate at Scal-holt began to be in a bad way, for the
outgoings were great and the income small, and the bishop was unable
to go on his visitations, wherefore all fees ceased, and it could not
go on to the end of the year without the need of some greater supply
[than was in store].

4. After Yule men were sent from Scal-holt to fetch the bishop-elect,
and he started from the east at Lent, and with him John Loft's
son, who was in those days the greatest chief in Iceland; and they
came to the estate at Scal-holt half a month before Easter [1175],
and Gizor Hall's son was already there. There were also other men
there who were the friends of the bishop, and the chief men of the
country-side. Then Thor-lac took up the governance of the estate,
and there was straightway a great debt run up for those things that
there was need of which the place required. And he had forthwith
great trials [to undergo], both in dealings with them that were there,
and other unpleasantnesses which he had to put up with, but he bore
them all patiently.

5. Bishop Clong lay in bed very weak, and Thor-lac abode at Scal-holt,
because men would not let him go abroad by reason of the broken peace
that was at that time between Norway and Iceland, for there were
cases unsettled which had arisen between the two lands by reason
of manslaughters and robberies, wherefore he remained for certain
winters. But when bishop Clong was dead [Feb. 28, 1176], it came to
this, that he thought it needful that there should be no longer the
lack of a bishop in Scal-holt, as it was now. Then he would not let
his journey be stayed any longer. And it was of no avail though he
were dissuaded from his journey by reason of the broken peace. He
took example by the word of Paul the apostle, 'Ye shall not be afraid
for the threatening of the wicked,' said he [cp. Heb. xiii. 6]. And
after this he made ready, but would take but little money with him
in comparison with what others had taken before him, and no great
following, and he had a fair voyage until they came to Norway.



8. 1. When Thor-lac the bishop-elect came to archbishop Ey-stan, he
received him wonderfully well, and soon let it be known that he would
cheerfully do all on his part that he thought needful, save that he
would not give him the office of bishop without he got the king's
consent. A father and son at that time held rule over Norway--king
Magnus and earl Erling his father--and they entertained Thor-lac's
case very unwillingly, and from this quarter there came angry words
rather than easement to the end that neither men nor goods should
be untouched [i. e. that an embargo should be laid on Thor-lac and
his men, and they themselves attached]. But Thor-lac made light of
this, and showed that all his heart was there, as [David] teacheth
in the Psalter [Ps. vulg. cxvii. 8], 'It is better to trust in the
Lord than in princes,' wherefore he let the matter pass by him. But
the archbishop felt himself to be in great jeopardy, for he wished to
love both, and he also wished to observe that which Peter the apostle
teacheth in his epistle: 'Fear God,' saith he, 'and honour the king'
[1 Peter ii. 17]. And it was made manifest throughout that he wished to
satisfy both in this matter, and now the archbishop mediated between
them and other men of good will; and it came about that the king
and the earl consented that Thor-lac should take bishop's orders,
and there was brought about a show of friendship between them, and
they gave each other gifts before they parted. And king Swerre hath
oftentimes said, who was both a man of weighty speech and of wise
judgment, that all things went smoothly for that father and son both
in battle and well-nigh all else, when there was friendship between
them, and Thor-lac was out there in Norway.

2. Thor-lac was hallowed bishop by archbishop Ey-stan in the days of
pope Alexander [III], three nights after the passion of the apostles
Peter and Paul [July 2, 1178]. There was present at the consecration
Eiric, bishop of Staf-anger, who was afterwards archbishop in
Thrond-ham, after archbishop Ey-stan. The third [including the
archbishop] that was present at the consecration of bishop Thor-lac
was Paul, bishop of Bergen, a paragon of men, and a friend of bishop
Thor-lac all his life after. Bishop Thor-lac was but a short while
with the archbishop after he had received consecration, because he
knew very well what desire there was for his return to Iceland to
the sheep over whom he had been appointed [pastor].

3. And when bishop Thor-lac had departed from the presence of the
archbishop, the other bishops that were with him asked him what
he thought of bishop Thor-lac. He said that he thought he had never
consecrated a bishop whom he thought his peer in all the qualities that
a bishop ought to have, as the apostle Paul saith in his epistle which
he sent to Titus: 'A bishop should be,' saith he, 'blameless and of
good learning, of simple life and no drunkard, a free giver and not
greedy, sage and sober, a lover of good and given to hospitality,
righteous in his life and of good report, a pure liver and prudent,
trusty and truthful, open-handed and out-spoken, loving to all men
but a rebuker to transgressors' [Tit. i. 7, 8]. And it is manifest
that to have these gifts is the mark of a holy man. 'And I cannot
show you better how wise his ways have appeared to me,' said the
archbishop, 'than by saying that I would like to live my last day
as I see him live every day.' And thereby it is manifest how wise
and clear-sighted he must have been by this opinion of his about the
beloved bishop Thor-lac.

4. Bishop Thor-lac went down to take ship with his followers, and when
they were well-nigh ready to sail the shipmen loaded the ship till
she would hardly swim with the loose [deck] timber, and two boats that
they lashed outside the bulwarks. Then the bishop went ashore out of
the ship and told the shipmen that he thought she was overladen. Then
answered one of them whose name was Macan, 'Thou hast no share in the
ship,' said he, 'and thou shalt not say how she shall be loaded.' The
bishop answered, 'I forbid you in God's name,' said he, 'to load her
to the sinking point, and I charge you with the lives of all them that
journey with you.' Then the bishop went aboard again, and they put to
sea with her as she was. And when they were come hard by Iceland there
came up a great gale, and gat great damage, the halyard parted and
the sail was carried away overboard. Nearly all of them were minded
to make vows [for safety], but bishop Thor-lac said that they should
not make vows till they had cast overboard some of their lading. And
when it was cast overboard as the bishop wished, immediately the gale
abated and they made land the next day, and bishop Thor-lac came home
to Scal-holt [Aug. 9, 1178], the day before Lawrence-mass-day.



9. 1. Men were very fain of his home-coming, and he straightway began
to take up the quiet rule of those things that came before him with
power and zeal. Nevertheless he kept closely to all the rules of the
canonry that he could comply with now that he was become a bishop,
both as to the fashion of his garments and in vigils and fasts and
prayers. He began to order anew the ways of the household and customs
of the house, which order of his endured all his days in many ways.

2. Bishop Thor-lac gave the most love and affection to those priests
and clerks that lived soberly and kept their orders somewhat according
to the rules thereof, and these he duly prized and established them
fairly [i. e. gave them good livings] as far as the means [of the see]
allowed. But those clerks that lived less soberly and observed their
orders less carefully, he admonished them with kindly ordinances to
do better, and turn their paths aright and the ways of those that
they had to care for. But they that did not change for his gentle
admonitions he rebuked with strong compulsions and gentle penances, as
the apostle Paul taught Timothy [2 Tim. iv. 2]: 'Thou shalt admonish,
exhort and rebuke, with all long-suffering and doctrine.'

3. He took great care of the estates of the see, and would ever make
able men stewards, so that he might be the most free himself from
those cares; but yet that the income of the estates might flourish
according to what was possible, but yet so that all might be provided
that there was need of. And he managed his income so wisely that all
wise men straightway fell to saying how good was the order he kept
in all matters.

4. But no matter how great care he gave to the ordering of all that
touched his income so that all might go in the best way, yet he gave
his best thought to all that touched the Church, and that the clergy
should be chosen from among the best in all ways, and along with this
he took care of the way that the clergy did all their services, and
taught them lovingly all the duties that they were bound to fulfil
according to their several orders.

5. He made a form of confession for the use of all the clergy in
his diocese [Dipl. Isl. i. p. 240], so that all might order it one
way. And he bade all men go to shrift once every twelve-month at least;
and all they that served at the altar, if they fell into any capital
sin, he bade confess themselves every time before they touched God's
service or sung mass.

6. He used to gather together the clergy home to him at Scal-holt
at the great feasts, and then he would tell them what each man ought
to do so that everything that each was bound to do should go fairly
forward in God's sight. And the more zealous he was with regard to
other men, yet ever he did best of all himself, so that every one
could distinguish what he did from what all the rest of the clergy
did, so finely did he prepare all the services in God's sight, so
that it was a joy to see and give ear thereto.

7. Bishop Thor-lac often preached sermons, and this was a great trial
to him, for he was slow and hindered of speech, but his words were
so sweet and so well put together that it must needs come into the
mind of them that listened to his sermons how David speaketh in the
Psalter: 'O Lord, Thy words are sweeter in my throat than honey and
than honeycomb in my mouth' [Ps. cxix. 103]. These same words of God
bishop Thor-lac put forth also in his life with such fair ensamples
as that there could scarcely be found such goodly ones in the life
of any man that was then alive.

8. Bishop Thor-lac would keep long vigils by night when other men
slept, and he would pray fervently that he might inherit this which
God spake: 'Blessed is that servant,' saith He, 'whom the Lord shall
find watching when He cometh to visit him' [Matt. xxiv. 46]. And that
is also clearly spoken in the Word of God which He spake Himself:
'Watch ye,' saith He, 'for ye know not what hour your Lord cometh'
[Matt. xxiv. 42]. And it hath been well proven that Thor-lac must have
seldom had these words out of his mind, because that hath now come to
him which God promised to them that were sober in watching, that 'He
would set them over all good things' [Matt. xxiv. 47] after this life.

9. The holy bishop Thor-lac used much to fast when he was at home
in his bishop's seat, remembering therein what the Lord Himself said
in the Gospel, that there is a 'certain kind of devil that cannot be
overcome save by prayer and fasting' [Matt. xvii. 21], and therefore
he conformed thereto in his life, wishing to overcome all the wiles
of the devils.

10. He comforted them that were sorrowful, and held out to them that
which the Lord Himself spake, 'Blessed are they that mourn now, for
they shall be comforted' [Matt. v. 4]; and in another Gospel when He
was speaking with His apostles, 'Your sorrow shall be turned into joy'
[John xvi. 20].

11. The blessed bishop Thor-lac strove with all earnestness to bring
together and make peace between those that were wroth and at enmity
with one another, telling them as it was said and as it is true,
that wrath blotteth out the righteousness of them she dwelleth with,
as James the apostle saith, 'That the wrath of man worketh not the
righteousness of God' [James i. 20]; and in another place [it is
written], 'Be not overcome of evil, but rather overcome evil with
good' [Rom. xii. 21], that is to say, wrath is to be overcome with
long-suffering and kindness.

12. Bishop Thor-lac was often looking in holy books, and reading
in holy writings, inasmuch as he forgot not that which the apostle
John saith in his book [Rev. xxii. 7], 'Blessed is he that readeth
and heareth the words of these books, and keepeth those things that
are written therein.' He would often be teaching clerks both to
read books and learn what else was useful to them; he perceived how
great need there was of good teaching, as David saith in the psalter
[Ps. lxvi. 16], 'Come hither, O my sons, and hearken unto me, and I
will teach you how ye shall fear God.'

13. He was ever awriting, and always he would be reading holy books,
according to the ensamples of the apostle Paul, as he saith in his
epistle [2 Cor. i. 13], 'We write none other things unto you than
what ye have most need to read and know.'

14. And whatever else bishop Thor-lac had to do his lips were never
silent from the praise of God or from prayer, because he kept in
mind what the apostle James saith in his epistle [James v. 16], 'The
effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man availeth much with God,'
and his prayer hath stood in good stead or availed much both to himself
and many others. The bishop was gentle and meek in all his ordinances,
and of wholesome counsel in every matter that he was sought to for:
and he hath now entered into that estate which God hath promised
them that are that way disposed, where He speaketh in the Gospel,
'Blessed are the meek, for they shall inherit the everlasting land
of the living' [Matt. v. 5].

15. Bishop Thor-lac sang mass every day both to his own and other
men's salvation, remembering continually the passion of the Son of God,
and he hath now thereby received for his service the more fair reward
according as he was more frequent and noteworthy in that office than
most other men.

16. He applied himself greatly to the cherishing of the poor; he
used to clothe the cold and feed the hungry, whereby it was easy
to see that that never went out of his mind, which is to be looked
for on the last day, namely, how much it is declared to weigh in the
scales what a man shall have done for the poor in this life. And he
did this over and above what other good men had done before him, in
that he would have poor folk called together at the greatest feasts,
twelve or nine, or seven or five, and would go in secretly where
they were and wash their feet, and wipe them with his hair, and give
each of them some good alms ere he went away. And this he did rather
after the example of God than of men, for He washed the feet of His
apostles, and afterwards let Himself suffer for the salvation of all
mankind. Moreover the Son of God spake thus when He had washed His
apostles' feet, 'Do ye after my ensample as I now do to you' [John
xiii. 15]. Wherefore the blessed bishop Thor-lac let the washing of
feet go before the gift of charity or mercy.

17. Nor could his dear friends and trusty men keep silence after his
departure over a matter they felt they knew of a certain--to wit, that
he had a kind of secret penance and work of charity, the knowledge of
which he did not trust to any one, as God commandeth, that the 'left
hand should not know what the right hand doeth' [Matt. vi. 3]. And
the bishop's dear friends dared not afterward to make that more known
which he himself wished to be left so hidden or secret.



10. 1. Bishop Thor-lac was wont often to have speech with good men and
them of a righteous life, to make acquaintance with their ways thereby
and strengthen them by his wholesome admonitions, that they might stand
fast in their well-doing. He also kept strict watch over the deeds of
those men that did not beware of their own sins, in order to lead them
back from wrong paths, and call them back into right paths, though
they had gone amiss before, according as the Lord spake, 'I will not
the death of a sinner, but rather that he should turn to me and live'
[Ez. xviii. 32]. This the blessed bishop Thor-lac showed to all that
would repent of their faults, and if they would follow his advice,
he was then rejoiced, and showed mercy to them with light penances,
according as the prophet of God said, 'That whatever day a man will
turn to God that he should then live a good life and die no ill death'
[Ez. xxxiii. 11]. But they that would not turn to the right way by
his kindly upbraiding, and not forsake their dangerous condition at
his rebuke, then he would interdict some, and excommunicate others,
according as Christ bade His disciples: 'Ye shall rebuke your brother
lovingly,' and 'if he neglect to hear thee, let him be to thee as a
heretic or a heathen' [Matt, xviii. 15, 17]. He bore patiently the
evil deeds of men, but he grieved greatly at their evil condition,
and never consented to the evil conversation of wicked men, though
he was quick to hearken to what God speaketh: 'Blessed are they
that suffer patiently, for they shall be called the sons of God'
[Matt. v. 9]. He suffered at men's disobedience, because he wept at
the ghostly wounds of them that were under his charge, as was the way
with the apostle Paul with regard to God's Christendom in his days,
that 'no man suffered or was afflicted,' but he felt in himself,
'in his own body those sufferings by reason of the love he bore them'
[2 Cor. i. 6, paraph.].

2. The holy bishop Thor-lac so used the authority that was given to
him when he was consecrated, to bind and loose on God's behalf the
condition of men, that it seemed to wise and righteous men as if there
was equal care taken on the one side, that there should be no passion
or lack of moderation, yet on the other, that he was never so slack
or lenient, though it were a difficult matter to deal with, that it
did not savour rather of meekness and mercy, though he were to wait a
long time, if it were rightly considered. He let it often come into his
mind what David saith, that the 'Lord loveth mercy and righteousness,
and showeth forth glory and loving-kindness' [Ps. lxxxvi. 5].

3. This is also to be recorded, that bishop Thor-lac loved that
place most after Scal-holt which he had adorned with his presence
[i.e. Thick-by]. He hallowed as abbot of Wer, God-mund the son
of Bialfe, a good man and righteous, open-handed and void of
pride. Thor-kell Gar's son that was spoken of before in this story,
went thither under the rule thereof, and kept it well as long as he
lived, and died in the ninth year of the bishopric of bishop Thor-lac.

4. In the days of bishop Thor-lac it was made law to keep holy
Ambrose-day, and Cecil's-day, and Agnes-day; and to fast the vigils
of the Apostles' masses, and Nicholas-mass.  He strictly ordered the
Friday fast to be kept in such wise that there should be two meals
eaten on no ordinary Friday, save the one that is in Easter-week. He
kept Friday so strictly himself that he ate nothing solid if he were
well; but he was so lenient and easy in this when he was sick that he
would eat white meat on Ember-days and Fridays if he were asked to
do so, and these ensamples he gave to men who now would act just so
as they hope may seem best in God's eyes. Bishop Thor-lac was sick
while he was bishop on a time when Yule-day fell on Friday [1181,
1187 or 1192], and he was in weak health, and he used flesh that day,
and showed an example therein that it were better so to do.

5. He took great pains to keep those folks together that were bound
in holy wedlock, and laid heavy penalties in fines and shrifts upon
them that had made grievous breaches therein. For he thought that
it was the greatest offence to God if that indulgence which is the
greatest worldly thing He hath given to man, and which He hath made,
for His loving-kindness' sake and out of mercy and by reason of
the lusts of men, lawful and blessed, which indeed otherwise were
a capital sin--if this indulgence were monstrously disgraced and
wrongly abused. And the moneys which some paid for their sin he
would never mix with other money, but set them apart, that those
households which lived well together but were poor might be enabled
thereby to continue in the same [rather than be parted by poverty],
and he would that this might be some further amends and compensation
for their faults who had paid their moneys.

6. In his day, bishop Thor-lac broke all those connections which he
knew to have been unlawfully made, whether those that had part therein
were great or small. He was not able to live in all communion with some
[great] men and chiefs, because he would only consent to the doings
of those that were right and good. He thought it were a far greater
destruction to God's Christendom if gentle-folks were to be excused
in great matters, and he would not show them any more indulgence,
when they did not keep themselves from unlawful dealings in this
kind, because they had received from God a greater portion of wealth
and honour.



11. 1. Now it is to be told of the every-day habits of the blessed
Thor-lac how temperate he was in all good courses. He never spoke
a word that did not tend to some good purpose when he was asked
anything. He was so wary of his words that he never blamed the weather
as many do, or any of those things that are not blameworthy, but which
he perceived went according to God's will. He did not look forward to
any day above the rest, nor did he dread any one much, save it were
the All-moot and Ember-days--the All-moot, because he thought that
many a man went astray in the cases he had there, even a man of great
worship in a matter which he had at heart, or thought of great import;
and the Ember-days, because he thought it a great responsibility to
consecrate men who had come a long way therefore, but whom he saw to be
very poorly fitted therefore, both by reason of their small learning
and other conditions not to his liking. Nevertheless he could not
find heart to refuse them, both because of their own poverty, and for
the sake of them that had presented them or sent their tokens withal;
wherefore he would tell every man piece by piece what duty appertained
to each order, and handed over the responsibility in the matter to
themselves and them that had sent them to be ordained.

2. He was so regular in his fasts when he was at home, and in vigils
and prayers whether he were at home or not, that it was always to be
guessed what he would be doing. He used so little food that one could
not but think that he would often put away his food when he had the
most desire for it. His way with regard to drink was that one could
never see it to have any hold over him, even though he partook of
strong drink. But he had such luck with regard to [the brewing of]
drink when he was entertaining his friends, that the ale never went bad
when he blessed it and made the cross over it with his hand, when it
was about to work. He was easy to satisfy and so friendly at feasts
when there was drinking that he put up with any kind of drink, no
matter how poor if it was not quite bad. But whenever bishop Thor-lac
drank water or other harmless drink, he did it so soberly and with
such restraint that he would sip three sips of it or five or seven,
and well-nigh never more. Moreover he well-nigh never drank between
meals when he was not ill, and there was not a public drinking-feast.

3. Bishop Thor-lac was never quite hale during the whole of his
bishopric, and this was to be looked for according as Paul the
apostle saith, that 'the strength is made perfect out of sickness'
[2 Cor. xii. 9]. He would let the doctors often perform operations
upon him for his ailment, and showed that God had ordained leeches that
they might at times by the Lord's will stop long ills by short pains.

4. Bishop Thor-lac kept regular habits in his prayers beyond that of
most other men. He used to sing first the Credo and the Pater Noster,
after he had crossed himself, and the hymn Jesu Nostra Redemptio,
and thereby showed forth straightway that he was ever thinking
of that salvation by which God hath ransomed mankind and [set]
true love between God and men, the desire of everlasting bliss and
presence with God, the dread of the judgment-day, and the coming
of the Maker to judge all mankind--all which is proclaimed in this
hymn. Then he would sing the Prayer of Gregory while he clad himself,
and afterwards the first psalm out of the Psalter, for he never let
those wholesome admonitions go out of his head which stands in this
psalm: 'Blessed is he that walketh not after them that be of evil
counsel and consenteth not to the evil doing of sinners, and judgeth
not wrong judgments, but ever observeth the laws of God' [Ps. i. 1,
2]. And when he came to church, he first sung the praise of the Holy
Trinity, and afterward he would praise with song those saints to
whom the church was hallowed, which he then happened to be in, and
whose holy relics were kept there. Then he would read the Hours of
Mary, and after that he would fall on his face on the ground before
the altar, when it was not a holiday, and pray long for the whole
Church of God. And every day he sung the third part of the Psalter,
beside the chants for the day, whether he were at home or not. And
he used to sing more [doxology] between the psalms than other men,
for he used first to sing Gloria Patri to the Holy Trinity, and
next Miserere mei Deus, and then Salvum fac Pater et Domine for all
Christian people. But if there came a difficult case before him,
he used to sing the verse wherewith Solomon the wise man prayed to
God in his days, Mitte mihi, Domine, auxilium de Sancto, and when
he went forth from the table he used to sing Benedicam Dominum in
omni tempore; and when he took off his clothes to sleep he sang the
psalm wherein the Lord is put in remembrance of His promise that they
shall be without fear that keep His counsels righteously, and hurt
others neither in word nor work. This psalm is, Domine, quis habitabit
[Ps. xiv], and it was a great joy to him to keep such customs, for he
thought that some one might perchance follow after his habit therein.

5. He took pleasure in stories, and poems, and all songs and lays,
and wise men's conversation and dreams, and all that good men took
pleasure in, save plays, because he thought that such things kept
men away from the unprofitable ways of wicked men [wherefore he was
beloved by all that were about him].

6. Bishop Thor-lac dreamed this dream at the All-moot: he thought he
was walking from the church there at the Moot to his booth carrying
the head of St. Martin in his arms, but Paul the priest of Reek-holt,
a man of worth, read his dream so, that he himself would afterwards
bear a holy bishop's head wherever he went, and it is now manifest
to all that this is true.



12. 1. When bishop Thor-lac had been fifteen winters in his see of
Scal-holt in the office of a bishop, in the bright bloom of good works,
beloved by God and by good men, [but] much wearied by his adversaries
and also by manifold ailments, then he declared secretly to certain
of them whom he trusted that he was minded to give up the bishopric,
saying, that they needed to get a stronger ox under the yoke which he
had been set under hitherto, and he himself wished to go back to his
house of Canons with lowliness, and serve God and the saints there
as long as he lived.

But Almighty God, who had raised him up to the highest place of
clerkly office, saw that he might yet be worthy of a glorious reward,
even though his honour was not lessened in men's eyes, wherefore he
would not let this come about, but rather prepared for him such a
holy preparation for death as every wise man would chose for himself
and his dearest friends.

2. Bishop Thor-lac went for the last time round that Quarter which lay
nearest to him; and in Borg-frith there came upon him the sickness
that brought him to his grave. He came home to the seat of his see
with but small strength, and lay abed three months with a troublesome
illness all the while, but never great pain; and he was able to pay
heed to all things that were of most import to himself and others as
well as if he had been a hale man.

There was then staying at Scal-holt Gizor Hall's son, who was both a
wise man and kindly. He came often to see the bishop in his weakness,
and strengthened him with many fair histories, both interesting and
rare, of the saints, or other good men that had borne their afflictions
best in their trials. There came there also many of his friends and
kinsmen to see him, and get good counsel from him, and show him their
true love with all their heart. Paul, his sister's son, came to him
in his sickness, showing then as before that he was the most loving
of all his noble kinsmen.

3. But when the sickness of bishop Thor-lac began to grow greatly
upon him, he sent to fetch Thor-wald the son of Gizor Hall's son,
who had both understanding and knowledge in great store, and was ever
deemed well fitted to have the direction or decision of all matters of
weight. And when he was come, the bishop gave him a careful account
of the whole state of the lands and properties of the see, both how
it had stood when he came to it, and what was the state it had now
reached when he believed that he could manage it no longer. He also
counted over to him particularly those outlays which he had spent
upon his kinsmen since he came to the management of the estate,
and how he had brought them into a thriving state, no matter how
much they had lacked. But when they saw that the estates had become
much easier to manage and much wealthier in revenue, and that there
had been great lack of money in them that were near-of-kin to him,
then, by the counsel of Thor-wald and his other friends, he endowed
his kinsmen yet again with certain outlays.

4. He declared that he wished to give his raiment to the clergy,
and the richest he gave to the bishop that should come after him, but
he would not give any indication as to whom he should be. His other
raiment he gave to priests and other clerks, and the worst to the poor,
for he would never leave them out when he was sharing gifts among his
friends: and it was a joy to him then that he had given many hundreds
[of money or cloth] and many ship-pounds or weights of meat to them
every season.

To bishop Brand of Holar he gave a finger-ring, but the ring he himself
had borne daily on his hand he gave to Paul his sister's son, that was
bishop next after him, and it was his consecrated ring, and many took
it as a sign or token of the honour that afterwards came upon him. And
this blessing was forthwith manifest, which is now not wondered at,
so that every man deemed he got some good that got some remembrance
that had once belonged to him.

5. Bishop Thor-lac went over particularly all private business with
Thor-wald before they parted, which he thought most necessary for him
to know; some he kept secret, others to be disclosed after his death.

6. Seven nights before he died, the bishop called together the clergy
and had himself anointed; and before he got the unction he made a
very long speech, though speech was slow and hard to him. 'When I lay
abed before,' said he, 'with little strength and received unction in
that sickness also, and when the chaunt [of the service for the dying]
was to be performed as it is now, then I declared beforehand that all
those men that were under grave charges before me should be free of
his sentence if I were to be taken away. And this I meant as an act
of mercy, but not as a condemnation of what I myself had done. But
the reward I got therefore was that those, who would not treat my
intent fairly, said that they could see that I had felt in my mind
that I had gone farther in my sentences than I should, and that I
was wishing to mitigate them altogether after my life was gone. But
now I will give a proof [and show] whether these things have been
true. Ye shall now hearken to and declare my sentence--that I will
that all my sentences stand and the declarations of excommunication,
unless they [that are under them] be reconciled to those men whom
I have appointed to loose my laws, and I hold forth no absolution
other than that which I have laid down before, and if not they must
wait for the bishop that is to come after me.'

7. And when he had said this, then he rested first, and afterwards he
spoke to them that stood by: 'I wish to pray you,' said he, 'that ye
forgive me whatsoever I have done that ye have not thought right.' All
they that were by answered that they knew of no such thing, but yet
that they would willingly grant him what he had asked of them. Then
Gizor Hall's son spake on behalf of all, for he was the best fitted
in every way: 'We pray you, my lord, to forgive us that which we have
misspoken or misdone towards you, and we are afraid that it is both
much and great.' And the blessed bishop Thor-lac consented cheerfully
thereto. Then Gizor made a second speech, and it is now manifest
that the Holy Ghost was speaking through him: 'We pray you this,
my lord, although ye seem now to be parting with us as far as the
bodily presence, that ye be a ghostly father to us and an intercessor
for mercy with Almighty God, for we believe this, that ye will have
no less power in the spiritual life with God than ye have now.' But
he was silent and answered nothing, and it is manifest why he did
so, because now he granteth all that which he was then asked to do,
but he would not then make it apparent, by reason of his lowliness,
that he could think that he would be able to do this. And in this he
behaved after the ensample of the Son of God, when he gave assent by
holding his peace to certain things that were true, as the saints say
[in the Gospels]. But when they had spoken thus, they that stood by
were so overcome that there were few but could refrain from weeping.

8. But when the lord bishop saw that, he spake, 'Do not take it sore,
though our lives must part. I have been a man of small account in
every way, and little able to do aught if other men had not upheld me,
wherefore ye have small loss in me, and I am going as it is appointed
to me, but he shall come after me that shall be a man of great
account. Moreover I will give you this comfort, that I am in [good]
hope that God will not condemn me as one of the damned.' Then he kissed
all his clerks and the rest of them that were in his household, and
gave them all his blessing. After this he received the last unction,
and after that he would say nought but what he deemed most needful,
but ever as long as he could his lips moved in prayer as long as he
was alive.

9. When seven nights were passed from the time when the blessed bishop
Thor-lac was anointed, he asked early in the day that his clothes
might be changed. Then Orm Eyj-olf's son the priest, his chaplain,
went to him and said, 'We think it dangerous to move you, my lord,
so weak as ye be, and will ye not keep your clothes in case ye have
no long life?' The bishop answered: 'It will do no harm to move me,
and as to the unction I put my trust in God's mercy and not in these
clothes.' Then other clothes were given him, and there came no harm,
as he had told them [there would not]. That day men did not see that he
had lost so much strength as [he] was afterwards shown [to have done],
because he kept up all those same goodly ways as he had maintained
before, though his strength was small, yet his heart was as steadfast
as before. But when the day wore on somewhat toward evening, then
it began to go more hardly with him; and when evensong was finished,
then they thought that he was fallen into a kind of swoon, but when he
opened his eyes he said, 'Whither didst thou go then, Thor-kel?' And
Gizor Hall's son took it that Thor-kel had appeared unto the bishop
at his death, because he had been the man that had most certainly
snatched him from jeopardy [of a worldly life].

10. And when bishop Thor-lac was come to his death, he asked them to
give him to drink, and when he wished to turn to take it, he sunk back
on his pillow and fell asleep sweetly with God; and God gave him this
glory, that he should thirst at his death as God's own son had done,
and the thirst of neither of them was slaked save in that everlasting
life which the sons of God are ever thirsting after. God let this be
made manifest in the death of the blessed bishop Thor-lac, that He
should fulfil what He spake by the mouth of David [Ps. vulg. cxv. 15],
'Precious in the eyes of the Lord is the death of His saints.' And
albeit it was at that time hidden from men that the state of the bishop
was such as it is now known to be, yet men did not deem it so to be
with him as it was with other dead men, but rather most men deemed it
better to be with his dead body than it was to be with other men alive.



13. 1. Those things took place after the death of bishop Thor-lac
that seemed of great import to them that were present and saw them,
but they told them to few men at first, because they hoped that God
would manifest more clearly what then was shown to them. This was
one thing, that his colour was much brighter and more pleasant than
that of other dead men. Another was, that the pupils of his eyes
were bright a long time after his death as in a living man that can
see. The third thing was, that there were many sores on his skin both
small and great, but they were all healed when they were looked for,
and they that saw it thought it even then of great import, but now no
man wondereth that it was so. There was a cloth laid over his face,
but when Gizor came he said, 'Let us see our father!' And the cloth
was then taken away. And when he looked at his face, he deemed it of
more account the pleasure that it gave him to behold it, inasmuch
as he was a man that knew best the meaning thereof. After this the
corpse of bishop Thor-lac was laid out carefully and his hair cut,
and men got great advantage from this relic.

2. He died the fifth day of the week [Thursday, Dec. 23], rather
late in the day, one night before the preparation for Yule. He was
then sixty years of age, and had been bishop fifteen winters. There
were then passed from the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ mclxxx and vi
winters [a thousand and a hundred and ninety and three years according
to the reckoning of Dionysius] [1193].



14. 1. On the morrow after, the corpse of bishop Thor-lac was carried
to church and set up in the choir two nights to await the burial, and
the second day of Yule it was laid in the earth. There were present
Paul the deacon, his kinsman, who was bishop after him, and all the
clergy that were in the neighbourhood. There came thither also at
the same time the body of a poor man whom the bishop had taken out
of beggary and maintained till his death-day; he had been a leper,
and God wished thereby to set forth this act of charity of his,
which was one out of many that he did for God's sake in his life.

2. But before men went away from the burying of the blessed bishop
Thor-lac, Gizor Hall's son spake a long and fair speech upon what
had taken place there according as the manner is over the grave or at
the burying of men of rank. And I will set down certain of the words
which he spake, which have gone least out of my mind. He set forth
to them first what a profitable man he had been both to the see and
to people in the country. After that he spake thus:--

3. 'I have been here present several times when such things took
place as have taken place here to-day. Five bishops have been laid
down here while I was standing by. First bishop Thor-lac Run-olfsson,
then bishop Cetil, and then bishop Magnus, after that bishop Clong,
but now bishop Thor-lac. I have also been used to speak some words
when these things took place, as the custom is in other lands at the
burying of men of rank: and the matter of discourse hath always been
exceeding good, because they have all been the greatest men of mark
in their bishopdoms. And it is good to remember this, that in our own
judgment and in the report of our forbears respecting those bishops
that have been here before our days and in our own days, that bishop
was always judged the best by those whom he was best known to. And
glorious men as they have all been, this is nevertheless peculiar to
Thor-lac, that he prepared himself for the office of bishop far more
carefully than all the rest. He kept himself in chastity all his life,
and he manifestly led a spotless life all his days with lowliness and
all kind of holiness. He was hallowed at once, when he was yet a child,
to the lower orders, one after another, until he was made priest as
soon as might be by reason of his age. And when he was priest, then
he gave himself to Almighty God under a regular life, and then he
was hallowed canon, and after that prior, and lastly abbot. Whereby
may be seen how he was looked on by his superiors and the wisest men
that were best able to judge beforehand of men, in that they hallowed
him to all the orders that he could take, for he kept so well every
degree of his orders, that there was nought to be thought of but to
go on giving him each new degree as long as there was any left.

'But nevertheless we are witnesses that, by God's mercy, his rank hath
now at this last been most advanced, inasmuch as he hath been called
from us into everlasting bliss and glory with God. And we who know so
well many of his good ways can hardly conform to what is commanded,
namely, to give express judgment upon no man's life. Still we have so
much confidence in his worth that I think few men have reason for hope,
if he be not now in full bliss, inasmuch as we know that he hath been
most unlike all other men in the goodliness of his life.'

Many other wise words Gizor spake in his speech, but none that have
better shown his foresight and good judgment than these which have
just been told, and which have been proven true by experience.


15. 1. Many things happened during those fifteen winters when Thor-lac
was bishop in Scal-holt, with regard to the deaths of mighty men. There
died then earl Erling [1179] and king Magnus [1184] his son, king
Waldimar [1182], Henry king of the English [1189], earl Eiric [1190],
archbishop Eystan [1188]. There was also a battle at Ila-fields
[1180]...

2. These died of Icelanders--Beorn, abbot of Thwart-water; Cari, abbot
[of Thing-ore, 1187]; Og-mund, abbot [of Holy-fell, drowned 1188];
Hall, abbot [of Thwart-water, 1190]; and many other clerks and men
of worth both here in the country and in other places [1588].










PÓLS SAGA.

1. 1. Þóll vas son Ioans, ens gaofgazta mannz, Loftz sonar, Sæmundar
sonar ens Fróða. Móðer Ioans vas Þóra, dótter Magnús konungs Berfoettz;
en móðer Póls vas Ragneiðr, [[127: 1.]] Þórhallz dótter, syster Þorláks
byscops ens helga. Póll vas foeddr upp í Odda með Ioane faoðor sínom;
ok lagðe hann sialfr, ok svá aðrer, því meire virðing á hann sem hann
vas ellre.

2. Póll vas vænn at álite, fagr-eygr ok fast-eygr; hrockin-hárr
ok fagr-hárr; limaðr vel ok lítt foettr [1589]; lit-biartr ok
haorund-lióss,5 meðal-maðr at vexte, ok manna curteisaztr. Hann vas
næmr, ok vel lærðr þegar á unga aldre; ok hagr at hví-vetna því es
hann goerðe, bæðe at rite ok at aoðro.

3. Hann kvángaðesc ungr, ok feck Herdísar Ketils dóttor, vænnar kono
ok vel at ser at hví-vetna því, es kvenn-mann mátte10 prýða.

4. En es þau haofðo faó vetr saman veret, þá fór Póll útan, ok
vas á hende Haralde iarle í Orkneyjom; ok lagðe hann mikla virðing
á hann. En hann fór suðr til Englannz, ok vas þar í scóla; ok nam
þar svá miket nám, at trautt vóro doeme til, at15 nockorr maðr hefðe
iam-miket nám numet né því líkt á iam-langre stund. Ok þá es hann kom
út til Íslannz, þá vas hann fyrer aollom aoðrom maonnom at curteise,
ok lærdóm sínom [1590], versa-goerð ok bóca-list [1591]. Hann vas ok
svá mikell radd-maðr ok soeng-maðr, at af bar soengr hans ok raodd
af aoðrom maonnom þeim es þá vóro20 hónom sam-tíða.

5. Hann fór þá enn til vistar í Odda, ok hafðe þá enn gótt yfer­læte
sem vert vas. En lítlo síðarr goerðe Póll bú í Skarðe; ok [[128:
1.]] vas margs til fyrst fátt þess es hafa þurfte; en svá kom
skaorung­skapr þeirra beggja hióna, ok góð-vild vina, í hald, at þau
aótto oeret hvet-vetna [1592] skams bragðs; ok urðo þau þó [1593]
fyrer enom stoerstom fiár-skaoðom; ok baóro þau hann vel ok prúðlega;
enda vas svá sem ecki goerðe af því, ok þá [1594] óxo fé þeirra sem
sær genge5 á land.

6. Póll vas raun-góðr ok fá-lyndr; ok þýðr við alla vine sína ok
alla góða menn; en hann vas stirð-lyndr við vánda menn, þiófa ok
íll-menne. Stiórnar-maðr mikell vas hann um alla hlute í sinne sveit,
ok oerr til-fara allz-staðar þar es þurfa þótte hans10 til-kvaómo.

7. Póll vas goðorz-maðr, ok hélt hann svá alla sína þing-menn til
allra réttra mála at hverge varð þeirra hlutr under.

8. Póll átte fiogor baorn, þau es or barnoesko kómosc, við Herdíse
kono sínne, sono tvá ok doetr tvær. Syner hans héto15 Loftr, ok
Ketill; en doetr héto Halla, ok Þóra: þau vóro aoll væn at álite,
ok vel at ser þegar (es) þau óxo upp.

9. Þorlákr byscop, móðor-bróðer Póls, lagðe á hann mikla virðing, ok
unne hónom miket, ok bauð hónom oft til sín. En þó nockorer haofðingjar
aðrer være and-streymer Þorláke byscope,20 þá vas Póll hónom því
traustare frænde ok full-trúe, sem aðrer gengo meirr undan. En þá
es Þorlákr byscop andaðesc, þá sýnde [1595] Póll enn sína ástlegre
frændseme an flester aller hans gaofger viner.

[[128: 2.]]

2. 1. Et næsta sumar efter andlát Þorláks byscops ens Helga vas Póll
koerenn til byscops: áðr vas miok laong til-roeða um þat mál: en þar
kom um síðer, at þat vas laget under Brand byscop, mest at ráðe Hallz
Gizoerar sonar; en hann kaus Pól til útan-ferðar. En hann iátte eige
brátt under at ganga, ok5 geck annarr til at aoðrom at biðja hann,
Brandr byscop ok svá broeðr hans, ok aðrer hans ást-viner; en hann
synjaðe, ok fór við þat heim af þinge.

2. Síðan fór hann í Odda til kirkjo-dags um Seljo-manna-messo með
mikelle á-hyggjo. En es aller vóro á þrotner at biðja hann10 til,
ok hann sá, at þá vas við oenga at bægjasc, nema í mót Goðs vilja
være--ok vilde hann þat víst eige þá es hann í-hugaðe sítt ráð--þá
skaut enn Helge Ande hónom því í hog, at leggja sialfan sik í ábyrgð
til þyrftar maonnom; ok geck hann þá síðan raosklega under þann vanda,
es hónom hafðe áðr lenge hogr við boðet.15

3. En lítlo síðarr fór hann í Scála-holt, ok Ioan faðer hans með hónom
ok broeðr hans, ok tók þegar við aollom fiár-forraóðom staðarens. Hann
bauð þá þegar þar at vesa Gizoere Hallz syne, es áðr hafðe þar veret
um daga Þorláks byscops ens Helga, ok mest staðar-prýðe vas at ok
híbýla bót, þeirra manna es þar [1596] være.20 Póll lét aoll en saomo
fiár-forraóð vesa í Scála-holte, sem áðr haofðo veret; en hann sette
Þorkel prest Hallz son til kirkjo-varð-veizlo; [[129: 3.]] ok sá [1597]
þiónaðe hónom fyrst, es hann kom út; en hann vas síðan canoce í Vere.

4. Herdís varð-veitte bú þeirra í Skarðe, ok baorn þeirra aoll, ok
aoll auðroeðe þeirra vel ok soemilega, meðan hann vas útan; ok vas þat
al-mælt, at einge baorn være svá vel vanið [1598] sem þeirra baorn5
í aollo heraðe; ok hélt þat vel skape meðan hon lifðe; af þvi at hon
vas allra kvenna vaondozt, bæðe fyre sína haond ok annarra manna,
sem oft bar raun á.

3. 1. Póll fór útan et sama sumar, sem hann vas til byscops koerenn
[1599], ok vas þá diacn at vígslom. Hónom greidd­esc10 sín ferð vel
unz hann kom til Noregs; ok fór síðan til Kaupangs í Níðar-óse, ok
vas þar um vetrenn unz leið Iól ... [1600] ok þóttesc hverr þeirra
manna bazt hafa, es hans soemð ok virðing goerðe mesta, því heldr es
gaofgare vóro; ok virðo þeir þá rétt.

2. Eirekr erki-byscop vas í Danmaorko þá es Póll kom útan til15 vígslo,
ok vas hann með Absalone erki-byscope; en Sverrer Magnus konungr vas
austr í Vík, ok fór þaðan á Upplaond. En efter Iól for Póll norðan or
Kaupange á fund konungs með síno faoro-neyte, ok (vas) þá með hónom
fiolðe konungs manna. En konungr tók svá vel við hónom, sem sonr
hans eðr bróðer være til handa20 hónom komenn; ok goerðe svá mikla
tign hans ok virðing, sem hann moende sialfr kiósa eða hans viner:
en bæðe vas, at hann [[129: 4.]] kunne betr an flester menn aðrer,
ok hafðe betre foere á; ok sló aollo við því es til goeða vas, es
þeir mætte báðer gaofgazter af verða.

3. Þórer byscop vígðe Pól til prestz í Hamar-kaupange. Þat vas á
Imbro-daogom á Langa-faosto, einne nótt efter Mathias-messo;5 ok fór
hann síðan aftr til konungs ena saomo nótt; ok vas þá með hónom,
unz hann fór til Danmerkr; ok feck konungr hónom alla hlute þá es
hann þóttesc hafa þaorf á or lande. Konungr lét ok alla byscopa fá
hónom bréf sín með insiglom þá es í lande vóro. Fór hann síðan til
Danmerkr um Faostona, ok kom til10 Lundar Pásca-dagenn fyrsta, á
fund erki-byscopa; ok bauð Absalon hónom þegar til sín, es hann kom,
með enne mesto soemð, en beið hans at há-messo, es [1601] hann visse
at hans vas þangat vaón.

4. Vas hann síðan með erki-byscopom [1602] um Pásca-vicona ok vas
í eno tígolegzto yferlæte af þeim baóðom; ok vas þá þegar ráðen15
vígsla hans; af því þeir gaóto brátt reynt þat hverr skaorungr hann
vas, bæðe at lærdóme ok vitrleik ok at-goerve. En hann beið vígslo
í munk-lífe því es heiter at Heraðs-vaðe; ok vas hann fyrr vígðr an
þeir haofðo þó ætlat es þeir skilðosc; ok kom þat mest til þess, at
Knútr konungr Valdemars son lagðe þau orð til, at hans20 ferð skylde
flýta efter því sem hónom gegnde bazt, ok þeim maonnom es hann skylde
byscop yfer vesa; ok fór þat efter an­narre [[130: 5.]] hans gæfo,
at enn gaofgazte maðr virðe hann þar svá mikels ó-sénan [1603],
at hann gaf þat ráð til sem hann munde sialfr kiósa.

5. Absalon erki-byscop vígðe Pól til byscops Ioans-dag byscops,
viij nóttom fyre Philippus messo ok Iacobus, at ráðe Eireks
erki-byscops, es eige hafðe þá sialfr sýn til at vígja hann: vóro
byscopar5 við vígslo Póls byscops, Eirekr erki-byscop ok Pétr byscop
af Róes-keldo. Póll byscop gaf goll-hring Absalone erki-byscope,
en annan Eireke erki-byscope, ok aollom aoðrom nockorar goersemar
þeim es studdo embætte hans vígslo ok tign. Celestinus vas þá Páve
es Póll byscop vas vígðr: Póll byscop vas þá fer-toegr at aldre es
hann10 vas til byscops vígðr.

6. Fór hann síðan til Noregs, ok fann Sverre konung í Vík austr,
ok fór með hónom til Biorgynjar [1604]; ok vas með hónom unz hann
fór til Íslannz et sama sumar; ok tignaðe (konungr) hann því meirr í
aollom hlutom, sem hann hafðe lengr með hónom veret,15 ok hann kunne
hann goerr. Aller virðo hann mikels, sem vaón vas at, ok hans frændr
vóro aller þeir es gaofgazter vóro í landeno.

4. 1. Póll byscop fór þá út til Íslannz et sama sumar sem hann hafðe
vígðr veret til byscops, ok kom í Eyja-fiaorð; ok veitte hann þá þegar
dýrlega veizlo Brande byscope ok20 aoðrom sínom vinom, þeim es þar vas
við kostr, vín at drecka, ok aoll aonnor þau at-faong sem mest maótto
verða. Sýndesc þat þá [[131: 5.]] þegar í fyrsto, sem oft urðo síðan
rauner at, at hann unðe þá ofallt bazt, es hann gladde sína vine sem
flesta ok vanda-menn, í veizlom virðolegom með ástúð ok skaorungskap.

2. Hann hafðe þá út með ser tvá gler-glugga at foera kirkjonne í
Scála-holte, festar-meyjo sínne andlegre; ok sýnde hann þá5 þegar,
þat es síðarr kom enn meirr framm, hvat hónom bió í hog, hverso miok
hann vilde þá kirkjo prýða, um þat framm sem áðr vas, es hann vas til
vígðr, þótt hon være áðr goervelegre ok dýrlegre an hver annarra es
á Íslande vóro.

3. Sú vas en fyrsta virðing es Póll byscop goerðe til síns stóls
ok10 sínnar kirkjo, um þat framm sem ne einn byscop hafðe goert áðr,
at hann soeng oenga messo áðr hann kom til stóls í Scála-holt: en í
aollom laondom es sú virðing á, at eige sé minna vert at hlýða prestz
messo ný-vígðz [1605] enne fyrsto, heldr an byscops messo ein­hverre;
en þetta mátte því meira, sem þá vas bæðe senn at hlýða15 prestz
messo ok byscops: ok dreif þá síðan fiolðe manna í Scála-holt til
þeirra fagnaðar tíðenda, at hlýða messo Póls byscops enne fyrsto. Þar
vóro þá marger gaofger menn við stadder, Ióan Loftz son faðer hans,
Sæmundr ok Ormr broeðr hans, ok Gizoerr Hallz son, ok vas þar þá miket
fiolmenne. Byscop mælte þá langt mál20 ok fagrt; ok hét þá þegar
því sem flester urðo fegnazter, at hann moende aoll boð þau bióða,
sem Þorlákr byscop hafðe boðet.

4. Þat mátte ok þá þegar brátt siá, es hann tók yfer-faor um sýslo
sína, hverso blíðr ok þeckr hann vas við alla sína under-menn, ok
[[131: 6.]] hverso ó-vant hann lét goera við sik aollom, es hónom
skyldo beina vinna eðr aðra hlute þá es skylt vas hann at tigna. Varð
hann við þat svá ást-sæll við alla alþýðo at aller unno hónom
hog-aóstom nálega um allt land, bæðe í sínne sýslo, ok svá í annarre
sýslo eige at síðr.--Þat vas ok auð-sýnt hvé mikell fé-maðr hann
moende5 verða fyrer sakar um, siá ok skaorungskapar ofallt í sí-fello.

5. Póll byscop hafðe einn vetr seteð í Scála-holte áðr Herdís,
kona hans, kom þangat til umb-sýslo fyr innan stock; ok vas svá
mikel stoð ok styrkr at, bæðe staðnom ok hónom [1606] siaolfom,
sem enge vas aonnor slík af maonnom meðan hann vas at stóle. Svá10
vas skaorungskapr hennar mikell ok umb-sýsla, at hon hafðe faó vetr
þar veret áðr þar vas hvet-vetna oeret þat [1607] es hafa þurfte,
ok einskis þurfte í bú at biðja, þótt hundrað manna være á búe,
en siau tiger eða átta tiger heima-manna.

5. 1. Póll byscop sá þat brátt es hann kom til stóls í Scála-holte,15
at hónom þótte þat skylt, at styðja ok styrkja, ok til loka foera,
þat es enn heilage Þorlákr byscop hafðe sínn vilja sýndan, ok hann
lét kaupa til: en þat vas at búa um cloccor þær es hann hafðe keypt
til staðarens í Scála-holte, es þá vóro baztar á aollo Íslande. Hann
hafðe ok [1608] fiogor tré haft út með clocconom,20 tví-toeg at hæð
alnom at mæla.

2. Póll byscop feck til síðan þann mann es hagaztr vas á aollo [[132:
6.]] Íslande á tré, es Ámunde Árna son hét, at goera staopol svá miok
vandaðan at efnom ok smíð [1609], at hann bar eige miðr af aollom
tré-smíðom á Íslande, en áðr kirkjan siaolf. Hann lét goera kirkjo uppe
í staoplenom, ok rið upp at ganga; ok vígðe hann þá kirkjo enom heilaga
Þorláke byscope enn tíunda dag í Iólom, ok bió þá5 kirkjo at aollo
fagrlega, ok feck þar hvet-vetna [1610] til þat es hafa þurfte. Hann
lét Atla prest, skrifara, penta allt ræfr innan í staoplenom, ok svá
biórenn; ok tialda allt et neðra þrennom tiaoldom, vel ok fagrlega;
ok svá lét hann skrifa yfer ser hvers leiðe þeirra niðr-setning,
hvers þeirra es þar hvíla í staoplenom. Hann lagðe eige minna fé10
til staopol-smíðar, at því es hónom hugðesc siaolfom at, an fiogor c
hundraða, eða þaðan af meira. Hann keypte cloccor þær í staopolenn,
es enar mesto goersemar vóro iam-miklar, at þeim manne Norænom es
Kolr hét. Hann keypte enn fleire cloccor til staopolsens, ok svá
sam-hringjor tvær uppe í kirkjonne; ok15 prýdde hána í hví-vetna því
[1611] es hogom mátte hyggja, bæðe kirkjo ok stopol, í búninge aollom,
í brícom [1612] ok í crossom, í scriptom, licneskjom ok laompom, ok
gler-gluggom, ok í byscops skrúðe allz kyns. Hann lét ok stein-þró
hoeggva ágæta haglega, þá es hann vas í lagðr efter andlát sítt;
ok hann lét búa crypt [1613] virðolega í20 staoplenom, þeirra manna
es hónom þótte mestr vande á.

[[132: 7.]]

6. 1. Á eno þriðja áre byscopsdóms Póls byscops andaðesc Ioan Loptz
son, faðer hans, Allra-heilagra-dag, sá maðr es þá vas gaofgaztr á
aollo Íslande. Hann virðe ser þat miket niðr-fall vesa, es þá vas
þess mannz við misst, es mest mátte hans virðing hefja ok styrkja,
ok vas skyldastr til allra manna.5

2. En Allz-valdande Goð, es hans gæfo lét ofallt vaxa dag frá dege,
en aldregi minka, goedde svá hans virðing, at enge maðr hafðe áðr
á Íslande orðet af sínom frændom iamn-gaofogr ok tigenn sem hann
varð þá af sínom ná-frænda, Þorláke enom helga byscope; af þvi at
þá birtesc dýrð hans ok heilagleikr, fyrst fyr10 norðan land, ok þar
efter um allt Ísland, ok aoll laond aonor þau es í naónd vóro. En þótt
Póll byscop yrðe þessom tíðendom fegnare an flester aðrer, þá fór
hann svá varúðlega með því mále, at hann hafðe allra haofðingja ok
ena vitrozto manna at-kvæðe fyrer ser um meðferð þessa máls [1614];
ok vas þat eige trútt, at15 eige legðesc sá orð-rómr á af noeckvorom
maonnom, at hann vilde þetta mál lítt á loft foera af heilagleik ens
sæla Þorláks byscops. En hónom kom þó þat til, at hann vilde svá launa
Goðe dýrð þá, es hann lét verða á hans daogom, es áðr hafðe aldregi
slík orðet, ok [1615] at hann vilde þá meðferð alla hafa, es vaón
vas20 at Goðe moende bazt þyckja. Þótte hónom vand-foert með vesa,
sem vas, at mundangs-miket være af teket í fyrsto, ok eige mætte at
saonno at finna. En enge trúðe fyrr né fram-kvæmðe an hann [[133:
8.]] dýrð ok heilagleik ens sæla Þorláks byscops, þótt hann foere
með varúðlegar an aðrer. En þó vas þat allra manna ráð enna vitrozto,
með orðsendingo Brannz byscops, at helgr dómr Þorláks byscops være upp
tekenn or iaorðo et sama sumar, efter því sem hann hafðe sialfr sagt
fyrer í berre [1616] vitran Þórvallz prestz á Iólom enom næstom5 áðr.

3. Efter þing þat et sama sumar, es þetta vas ráðet, sende Póll byscop
orð Brande byscope, ok broeðrom sínom, Sæmunde ok Orme; ok sonom
Gizoerar Hallz sonar, Þórvalde ok Magnúse; Þórleife Þorláks syne or
Hitár-dale, móðor-faoðor Herdísar; Katle10 syne hans; Þorláke Ketils
syne, bróðor Herdísar; Goðmunde preste Ara syne, es síðan varð byscop
at [1617] Hólom; ok maorgom aoðrom sínom ást-vinom. Póll byscop goerðe
dýrlega veizlo þeim maonnom es þar kómo; ok vas þar þá síðan tekenn
upp or iaorðo heilagr dómr ens sæla Þorláks byscops, ok búet þá um
virðolega,15 sem sómðe, efter for-siaó ok fyrer-saogn Póls byscops;
ok fylgðo iarteiner þá þegar þar stórar, sem sagt verðr í saogo hans;
ok vas þat dýrð hans, en gæfa Póls byscops.

4. Et næsta sumar efter vas leiddr í laog messo-dagr Þorláks byscops
um allt land; ok sett fasta fyrer, tveggja doegra. Efter20 þat sótto
marger menn þangat of allt land at dýrka enn sæla Þorlák byscop
í vaokom ok faostom, í boena-halde ok fé-giaofom, ok svá sótto ok
þeir menn þangat es í faorom vóro á hverjom [[134: 8.]] misserom
fiol-menner, bæðe út-lenzker menn ok Íslenzker; ok foerðo heit sín þar,
es þeir haofðo heiteð, ok seldo í haond Póle byscope, ok saogðo hónom
ser-hverja at-burðe sínna á-heita, ok iarteina þeirra es þeir þaógo
á móte; ok vóro hónom þat ofallt fegin-saogor. Þeir baóro aller á
braut sannar rauner heilagleiks ok5 dýrðar ens sæla Þorláks byscops,
en rausn ok stór-menzko Póls byscops.

5. En þó áðr være mikel virðing Póls byscops sem verðogt vas, áðr upp
koeme helge Þorláks byscops, þá goedde þat í miok metorð hans, es hann
átte sann-gaofgaztan móðor-bróðor; ok vætto [1618] marger,10 at et
forn-kveðna moende sannasc, at 'móðor-broeðrom verðe menn líkazter,'
ok þótte þar líkende maorg á goerasc, at þar moende ok svá vesa;
af þvi at hann goerðe marga hlute efter því sem enn sæle Þorlákr
byscop hafðe goert. Hann vas ráðvandr ok roekenn at tíða-goerð:
hann vas meinlæta-samr í faostom ok í klæða-búninge:15 hann hafðe ok
á-kenning allra hluta þeirra, es hann mátte varr við verða, at enn
sæle Þorlákr byscop hafðe í sínom haóttom; lítilæte, ok olmoso-goeðe;
harðlífe, ok þolin-moeðe, sem hvárr-tvegge þeirra varð í raun margre
ok mikelle í sínom byscops­dóme.20

6. Þá es Póle byscope þótte nockot samnasc ok saman dragasc fiár-hlutr
sá, es menn gaófo af góð-vilja enom sæla Þorláke byscope, þá sýnde
hann þat brátt hvat hónom bió í skape. Hann keypte [[135: 9.]] þá
síðan við goll-smið þann es Þórsteinn hét, ok þá vas hagaztr maðr at
malme [1619] á aollo Íslande. En svá urðo til-faong af hans hende,
at ecke skorte þat es hafa þurfte til þeirrar smíðar es hann vilde
smíða láta. Hann lét taka til scrín-goerðar; ok lagðe [1620] þar til
oer-grynne [1621] fiár í golle ok gim-steinom ok í brendo silfre. Hann5
lagðe þar ok eige minna fé til scríns [1622] ok smíðar-kaups, með
tillaogom annarra manna, an fiogor hundrað hundraða. Þat smíðe vas
miok svá vandat, (svá) at þat bar eige minna af aoðrom scrínom, þeim
es á Íslande vóro, um fegrð an um vaoxt; ok vas þat betr an þriggja
alna; en ecki vas annat betr an alnar langt þeirra es þá10 vóro
á Íslande. Enge man spyrja þess vitra manna es scrínet sér, hvert
stór-menne sá maðr hefer veret, es þá goerseme hefer goera láteð;
eðr til hvers hann hefer ok foerr veret fyrer efna saker.

7. 1. Á dogom Póls byscops kom útan af Groena-lande Ioan byscop, ok vas
í Aust-fiaorðom um vetrenn; en15 kom síðan á ofan-verðre Langa-faosto í
Scála-holt á fund Póls byscops; ok kom þar at Scír-dege; ok vígðo þeir
báðer mikenn crisma [1623]; ok haofðo þeir margar taolor trúlegar,
ok spaklegar roeðor sín á miðle. Póll byscop tók við hónom með enne
mesto soemð, ok veitte hónom virðolega veizlo meðan hann vas; en leyste
hann20 á braut með mikelle stór-menzko, bæðe í fé-giaofom, ok í annarre
virðing. Ioan byscop gaf maonnom ráð til, hverso vin skal goera [[135:
10.]] af kroeke-berjom, efter því sem Sverrer konungr hafðe hónom fyrer
sagt. En svá bar til, at þá et næsta sumar efter gat nær hvarge [1624]
ber á Íslande: en sá maðr es Eirikr hét, ok bió skamt frá Scála-holte á
boe þeim es heiter á Snorra-staoðom, bar saman nockot vín, ok varð vel,
á því eno sama sumre. En Ioan byscop fór til Noregs5 ok síðan til Róms,
ok roedde hver-vetna, þar sem hann kom, frá rausn ok tign Póls byscops.

2. Á daogom Póls byscops, þá es Gizoerr Hallz son hafðe laog­saogo, þá
geck mest af ser ranglæte manna um alner, bæðe útlenzkra ok Íslenzkra
manna, at eige þótte svá lengr vesa mega.10 Gaf (þá) þat ráð til Póll
byscop, at menn skylde hafa stikor, þær es være tveggia alna at [1625]
lengð; styrkðo þá aðrer haofðingjar með byscope, Gizoerr ok syner
hans, Þórvaldr, ok Hallr [1626], ok Magnus, þat mál; einneg broeðr
hans, Sæmundr, es þá vas gaofgaztr maðr á aollo Íslande; ok Ormr,
es bæðe vas laog-spakr ok at flesto forvitre;15 ok aller haofðingjar;
ok vóro þá laog á laogð efter því sem ofallt hefer haldesc síðan.

3. Á eno siaunda áre byscopsdóms Póls byscops andaðesc Absalon
erki-byscop í Danmaork, Benedictus-dag; ok á því eno sama áre
andaðesc Brandr byscop, Sixtus-dag, þá es hann hafðe20 byscop vereð
átta vetr ens fiórða tigar, enn meste skaorungr. Efter andlát Brannz
byscops koero Norðlendingar til byscops Goðmund [[136: 11.]] prest
Ara son, ok feck Póll byscop hónom bréf sín á fund Eiriks [1627]
erki-byscops; ok vas Goðmundr vígðr til byscops í Þróndheime x
nóttom fyrer Ioans messo byscops; ok vas þá Hákon konungr í Norege,
son Sverriss konungs. Goðmundr byscop fór til Íslannz et sama sumar,
ok kom í Aust-fiaorðo, ok fundosc þeir Póll byscop,5 ok goerðo mikla
soemð sín í miðle í veizlo ok fé-giaofom. Síðan fór Goðmundr byscop
til Hóla, ok sat þar at stóle með ó-hoegendom enom mestom fyrer margs
saker. Auðræðe urðo brátt eige mikel, en af-venzlor þótto varla með
mikelle stillingo: en þeir sem fyrer urðo, virðo hann heldr stirðan
ok stríðan í sínom boðorðom: en10 því vin-sælle varð Póll byscop
ok ástsælle við alþýðo lannz-manna, sem menn saó [1628] hver-vetna
hans for-siaó, en hoegende hans viðr-vistar ok boðorða við alla þá es
til hans aótto (at) hníga; ok æsto [1629] ser slíks yfir-boða aller
lannz-menn ef koste ætte.

4. Póll byscop let telja í þeim þrimr fiórðungom lannz, es hann15 vas
byscop yfer, kirkjor þær es at skyldo [1630] þurfte presta til at fá:
ok hann lét presta telja, hve marga þyrfte í hans sýslo; ok vóro þá
kirkjor xx ok cc tíroeð; en presta þurfte þá x miðr an ccc tí-roeð. En
því lét hann telja, at hann vilde leyfa útan-ferð prestom, ef oerner
være efter í hans sýslo: en hann vilde ok fyrer siá, ef svá20 felle,
at eige være presta-fátt í hans sýslo, meðan hann være byscop.

[[137: 12.]]

5. Á eno tolfta áre byscops dóms Póls byscops urðo þau tíðende, es
mikels vóro verð: þá andaðesc Gizoerr Hallz son tveim nóttom fyrer
Óláfs-messo. Um hann mælte Sæmundr, bróðer Póls, þeim orðom, at hann
være 'hrókr allz fagnaðar hvarge es hann vas staddr.'5

6. Þá kom eldr upp í Heclo-felle et þriðja sinn þrimr nóttom fyrer
Ambrosius-dag of vetrenn efter.

8. 1. Póll byscop vas svá mikell gæfo-maðr, at hónom gengo nálega aller
hluter at sólo enn fyrra hlut æve sínnar; ok þá hann svá þat [1631]
sem nú má nackvat heyra í hiúkolfe [1632] þeirrar10 frá-saogo es ek
hefe frá sagt, eige marga hlute hiá því sem emne ero til, at hann
[1633] þótte aollom maonnom ást-goðe. En Allz-valdande Goð goedde
hann því meirr es ofarr vas, bæðe at auðroeðom ok mann-virðingom. En
ef þat ætla nockorer menn, at fyr ástar saker hafa ek meira af teket
um frá-saogn of líf [1634] Póls byscops an emne sé15 til seld, þá
geta [1635] þeir eige rétt; þvi at þat stendr mer meirr í hog at ek
hafa mart merkilegt láteð efter liggja í frá-saogn hans æve, fyrer
fá-froeðes saokom ok ú-gá, ok lete at ríta, heldr an þat, at ek hafa
ne-eitt loget í frá-saogn.

2. Þann gæfo-hlut bar enn Póle byscope til handa þá es maonnom20
þroengðe ó-áran, ok biloðo maonnom saóð ok sæ-faong, ok vel flestr
[[137: 12.]] vetrar við-búnaðr, ok raoskoðosc [1636] af því for-lag
fénaðar fyrst, ok síðan manna: þá tók hann þat ráð, með ásiaó Þórvallz
Gizoerar sonar ok annarra vitra manna í sínne sveit, at heita á Goð
ok helga menn til ár-bótar, ok syngja þriú Pater Noster hvern dag
til dýrðar Goðe í minning ens helga Þorláks byscops, ok gefa hans5
dag um sumaret sauða-nyt at morgin-mále, ok vaondol heys af kýr-fóðre
hverjo, en maork af mioel-vætt hverre: ok kom aldrege síðan hallære
meðan hann lifðe.

9. 1. En af þvi at Goð vill eige ofallt efter-læte eino reyna
sína ást-vine; heldr vill hann sína menn al-goerva10 verða láta í
freistnenne ok mann-raunonom, ef vel standasc, sem hafa rauner af orðet
[1637]:--

2. Nú es Póll byscop skein í þeim blóma, at hans virðing ok vegsemð
geck ofallt í vaoxt; en Herdís aflaðe þeirra hluta allra í sínom
skaorungskap ok forsiaó, es staðrenn þurfte, í aollom goer­ninge15 þeim
es hafa þurfte; (þvi) at hon vas í allre [1638] umb-sýslo nákvæmzt
þeirra mála, es þaorf vas [1639] heima at stað, ok at aollom aoðrom
búom þeirra es byscop átte: baorn þeirra goerðosc at-goerve-menn
þegar á unga aldre: Loftr í hagleik ok lærdóme, ok vitrleik; Ketill
í skilningom [1640] ok rite; Halla í verknaðe ok bóc-froeðe; Þóra20 í
hlýðne ok ástseme. En af þvi at Goð mæler svá í Goð-spialle, at allt
mál skal standa í tveggja eðr þriggja vitne, þá berr-ek framm [[138:
13.]] með mer vitne Ámunda smiðs, es bæðe vas merkr ok rétt-orðr. Hann
kvað víso þessa--


    Loft efler Goð gifto (gengr fæst af því) hæstre:
    Koenn styðr krafte sínom Ketils lán iaofurr mána:

[**ERROR: Contains unhandled entity &OEacute;]
    &OEacute;ztr lér æve baztrar allz dróttenn þer, Halla!5
    Dýrr magnar [1641] þrif Þóro þengell haofoð-engla!


Slíko geck of þeirra hage ofallt, meðan þau aótto of heilt at sitja.

10. 1. En þá es Póll byscop hafðe seteð at stóle tolf vetr í
Scála-hollte, varð sá at-burðr, at Herdís fór heiman, várit efter
Pásca, í Skarð til búss þess es þau byscop aótto; ok10 skylde hon taka
hiónom, ok um aðra hlute þá sýsla es þar þurfte. Henne fylgðo baorn
hennar tvau, Ketill, ok Halla; en heima vas með byscope Loftr ok Þóra.

En þá es Herdís vas í Skarðe, þá goerðe vatna-vaoxt mikenn, ok goerðe
aóna Þiórs-aó ó-reiða: en hon vilde heim koma at nefndom15 dege,
af þvi at mart vas þat heima ó-ráðet es ætlað vas at hennar skylde
bíða. Lét hon síðan soekja skip, ok foera til árennar; ok fara þau
síðan til skipsens, Herdís, Ketill, ok Halla, ok Ioan bróðer Herdísar;
ok Biaorn hét prestr capalín [1642] byscops sá es þeim fylgðe:
[Sigfús prestr Grímsson] [1643]; Þórsteinn hét diacn or Skarðe;
Goðrún20 Þóroddz dótter ok systor-dótter Herdísar. Yfer aóna fór fyrst
Ketill [[139: 13.]] ok Biaorn, farar-skiótar ok reiðingar þeirra. Þá
týndesc reið-hestr Herdísar. Et oefsta sinn es yfer aóna skylde fara,
vas á skipe, Sigfús prestr [1644] Grímsson, Þórsteinn diacn, Herdís ok
Halla ok Goðrún, en veðr nockot byljótt. En es þau kómo í straum þann
es skamt vas frá lande, því es þau skylde til fara, þá barsc þeim á,5
ok kastaðe skipeno under þeim: en þau fóro aoll í kaf; ok kómo aoll
upp síðan: ok vas þat heyrt til beggja þeirra moeðgna, at þær sungo,
ok faólo sik ok sáler sínar Goðe Almaótkom á hende. Skilðe þar þá
feigan ok ú-feigan: Sigfúse [1645] sveif at lande; en Herdís, Halla,
ok Goðrún drucknoðo, ok Þórsteinn diacn; en Sigfúss vas þrekaðr10 miok
es hann kom at lande; en ecki vas þeirra manna á lande es knáleikr
vas yfer. En Almáttegr Goð emnðe [1646] aoll sín fyrer-heit, sá es
því hefer heiteð, at hann moende 'gefa huggon með hverjom harme;'
ok (at) 'hann moende einskis framar freista, an hverr moende bera
mega, þess hann býðr [1647].' Ok sýnde Goð þat hvárt-tveggja15 í
þessom enom haormolega at-burð: þá huggon bar at [1648] með harme,
at enn sama dag fundosc aoll lík þeirra manna es þar haofðo faresc:
ok vas sú huggan þá mest þeim es efter lifðo. En þat vas þó lítt með
glíkendom, nema Goð gæfe af sinne milde ok miskun­seme; af þvi at
svá vas vatna-vaoxtr mikell, at faóm nóttom síðarr20 rak hestenn í
Vestmanna-eyjar þann es þar hafðe faresc.

2. En es þesse tíðende kómo til eyrna Póle byscope á náttar-þele
[[139 : 13.]] váveiflega, þá sýndesc aollom, at Goð hefðe nær ætlað,
hvat hann moende bera mega: hann mátte ecki matar neyta; ok hann
hafðe eige svefn áðr líken vóro niðr sett; en þó leitaðe hann alla
at gleðja í því es hann mátte. En þó má hverr ætla, hvílíka mann-raun
hann hafðe; hafa misst með haormungo mannzens þess,5 es hann unne mest;
en siá í sí-fello hrygð á baornom sínom ok aollom þeim es hann átte
fyrer at hyggja. Stillilega fór hann með allre efter-goerð efter þær,
bæðe í fé-giaofom við kenne-menn, ok svá við fátoeka menn; ok sá hann
þat sem vas, at um allt þat es miklo varðar, es 'betre sígande arðr
an svífande [1649].'10

3. Ár-tíð Herdísar ok þeirra manna, es líf sítt léto með henne,
es xiiij nóttom efter Crucis-messo um váret; ok vas þat margra
manna skylda, lærðra ok ó-lærðra, at minnasc hennar svá roekelega
ok ástsamlega sem enna skyldozto náonga, fyrer sakar margra hennar
dýrlegra mat-ráða.15

4. Póll byscop veitte Þorláke, bróðor Herdísar, mikla huggon, boeðe í
orðom ok stórmannlegom fé-giaofom, þeim es hann gaf hónom; ok virðe
(hann) í aollom hlutom ecki minnr an áðr hann misste hennar við:
huggaðe byscop [1650] Þorlák [1651] ecki miðr efter frá-fall hennar
an sítt lið. Þóra dótter hans tók til forráða fyr innan stock20 efter
frá-fall móðor sínnar, með ást-samlegre ásiaó faoðor síns; ok vas hon
þá eige ellre an xiiij vetra gaomol, ok bar hon þat þó framm, svá at
þeim virðesc aollom bazt at [1652] hennar haóttom, sem kunnazt vas
[1653].

[[140: 14.]]

Byscop drap svá brátt yfer harm sínn, þann es hann hafðe beðet, at
flester menn þóttosc lítt á finna. En þó mego aller (menn) þat at
glíkendom ráða, at því olle meirr þolin-moeðe hans, ok at hann [1654]
vilde soema [1655] við alþýðo í síno blíðlæte, an þat, at hónom genge
or hog sá harmr meðan hann lifðe.5

11. 1. Póll byscop lét sialdan, nema þá es hótíðer være, kenna
kenningar hiá því sem áðr vas; ok virðe [1656] hann þá enn aollom
meira um vesa at sialdan næðe. En hann lét nálega hvern helgan dag tvær
messor syngja: fióra daga kende hann sialfr kenningar á hverjom tolf
maónoðom, Ióla-dag enn10 fyrsta [1657], ok Miðvico-dag enn fyrsta í
Faosto, Scír-dag, ok Kirkjo-dag, en þvi at eins fleire daga, at hónom
þoette nockor nauðsyn til bera.

En því get ek slíkra hluta við, es glíkt [1658] hafa goert þeir menn
es orð-vandazter [1659] ero ok vel kunnande [1660], ok þat ero mest
goeðe þeim es15 efter lifa, at menn mege þeirra doeme sem flest vita,
es aollom sé gótt efter at glíkja.

Á hverjom gistingar-stað hafðe hann for-mála sialfr, eða feck annan
mann til, þá es hann hafðe yfer-faor um sýslo sína nockor [1661].

2. Þiónoðo hónom ymser menn: fyrst Þórkell prestr Hallz son,20 góðr
kenne-maðr ok ráð-vandr, nockora vetr, unz hann rézc (í) [[141 : 15]]
canoca setr. Efter þat þiónaðe hónom Leggr prestr siau aór; en síðan
Norðlenzkr prestr sá es Biaorn hét, lítell maðr vexte, en þó vitr
ok vel lærðr ok fóstre Brannz byscops, hann fór útan síðan. Efter
þat þiónaðe hónom Brandr prestr Dales son, es áðr hafðe enn byscopom
þiónat, Brande ok Goðmunde byscopom. Ketill5 prestr Hermundar [1662]
son vas ok hans þiónosto-maðr, áðr hann andaðesc; ok hann varð-veitte
at staðnom cór [1663] ok kenne-menn efter frá-fall Póls byscops. Af
því léto ener fyrre byscopar enn sama ser þióna ofallt, hverr þeirra,
at þeir sýndo staðfeste ok iamnlynde skaps síns í því sem í maorgo
aoðro. En því let Póll byscop10 ser ymsa þióna, at hónom þótte því
betr, es fleire tignaðesc [1664] ok gaofgaðesc af hónom; en hvers
soemð vas með góðre virðingo meðan hónom þiónaðe, hvat sem fyrer
lagðesc síðan.

12. 1. Í þann tíð (es) Herdís andaðesc, tóko til vandhoefe mála
Norðlendinga, Goðmundar byscops ok Kolbeins15 Tuma sonar. En svá
sem vitað es, at alla lannz-menn tóko með miklom ó-hoegendom þeirra
vandreðe, þá sat þó Póll byscop fyrstr allra manna fyrer þeim vanda,
es ecki vas áðr ... [1665] í Norðlendinga fiórðunge. En hann vas
í svá vandan sess komenn um 20 þat mál; þvi at erki-byscop hafðe
sent hónom bréf sín með insiglom, at hann skylde styðja ok styrkja,
efter því sem hann hefðe faong ok foere á, maól Goðmundar byscops:
en Kolbeins mál studdo marger ást-viner Póls byscops, ok frændr ok
tengða-menn, þeir es [[141: 15.]] hann vilde í aollo ástúð sýna,
en mátte ecki at goera [1666]. En þeim raóðom vas eige hoegt saman
at koma, es Goðmunde byscope þótte ser ecki veitt vesa, nema Póll
byscop stoeðe á aondorðan [1667] meið með hónom; ok hann virðe
hvártke mennena né lannz-laogen, en forboðaðe eða bann-sette hvern
þeirra es nockot5 vildo móte hans vilja goera: en Póll byscop vas í
maorgo sinne góðr í biðom, þótt eige være allt efter því goert sem
hann sá at bazt sómðe; ok goerðe hann ser ok Goðe þann veg marga
at ávexte,  at (hann) hirte aðra hóglega; en þó nento eige aðrer
[1668] ofallt ílla at hafa. En Goðmundr byscop vægðesc, eige við10
þá menn meirr es í Póls byscops sýslo vóro, at eige forboðaðe hann
þá eðr bann-sette, þegar es þeir doemðo þá dóma es hónom vóro eigi
(við) skap, þótt laog-dómr være. En Póll byscop lét eige þau um-mæle
bíta menn; en þó lagðe hann á haond þeim nockora lítla script, til
varúðar þeim maonnom es fyrer því urðo eðr á-netjoðosc15 hans banne;
af þvi at hann unne betr sínom maonnom at hafa ... [1669] heldr an
sitja í nockorom ótta hvárt þeim mætte þat nockoð granda eðr ecke.

2. En es þeirra vandræðe gengo svá miok af ser, at þeir aótto bardaga
þann es Kolbeinn fell í, ok marger aðrer neyter menn,20 bæðe lærðer ok
ó-lærðer, en léto vine sína [1670] þeir es efter vóro .... [1671] En
efter þat goerðo þeir byscop at-farar at þeim es efter lifðo ok [[142:
15.]] nánazter Kolbeine ok stoekðo [1672] þeim í braut, en eignoðo ser
aoll þeirra fé, en kaolloðo þá í banne. En es Póll byscop varð þessara
ó-tíðenda víss [1673], þá bað hann sína vine, at þeir skylde eige
goera bráða at-faor at þeim. Ok bar þat til þess at hann vilde vænta
[1674] at 'blóð-nætr sé hverjom bráðaztar,' ok þat moende sannasc
sem mælt5 es, ok ætlaðe með meire stillingo ok ráðe faret verða,
ef lengr [1675] være biðat. En hann vætte í aoðro lage at Goðmundr
byscop moende mis-smíðe á siá, hve [1676] miket at vas orðet, ok
munde bióða góð boð til sættar ok soemðar þeim es til efter-mála-vóro
[1677]. En es þat drógsc undan; en spurðesc í aoðro lage ágangr þeirra
á hendr maonnom,10 ok raón ok áverkar ok allz-kyns ó-hætter nálega, þá
sende Póll byscop capalín sínn Biaorn til fundar við Goðmund byscop,
at biðja, at hann leiðrétte ok lægðe vandræðe þeirra með yfer-bótom;
ok bauzc til under-staoðo með hónom aðallega [1678] sem þyrfte--ef
hann droegesc eige sialfr undan--sínn góðvilja ok sín efne þau es
hann15 hefðe faong á, í auðræðom eða í aoðrom til-laogom.  Vas þat
auð-sýnt .... [1679] let-orð Póls byscops norðr-farar haofðingja fyrst
um hausteð, meðan harmr manna vas nýjaztr ok  sízt dofnaðr [1680] af
sárleik manna missis..... En síðan vas þess leitað [1681] við Goðmund
byscop, at hann ynne [1682] þeim (es) efter lifðo sína frændr gaofga
ok góða, auð-veldre20 leiðrétte sínna harm-saka, an nú .... vilde
firra háska, meðan [[143: 16.]] kostr være, Goðmund byscop ok hans
fylgðar-menn. En Goðmundr byscop þekðesc þat eige, ok virðe hann vesa
vin-hallan under haofðingja í slíkre um-leitan. En þat sýndesc þá brátt
með hverre vizko at vas hvárs [1683] þeirra for-siaó; af þvi at á sama
áre fóro haofðingjar til Hóla, ok raóko Goðmund byscop af stólnom; ok
ruddo5 á braut fiolða íll-þýðis es þar vas, seker menn ok ráns-menn,
ok reyfarar; ok draópo suma: ok varð þá at riúfasc sú illinga-seta;
ok urðo þá ok þaðan frá góð forlaog manna. Póll byscop bauð til sín
Goðmunde byscope með goezko ok góðvilja; þá [1684] hann þat eige,
ok goerðe at við-siaóm at finna hann, þvi at hann vilde eige hlýða10
hans heil-ræðom.

13. 1. Í þann tíð fór útan Loftr son Póls byscops, ok sótte heim tigna
menn í aoðrom laondom, Biarna byscop í Orkneyjom; en efter þat Inga
konung í Norege ok Hákon iarl bróðor hans, ok þá af þeim virðolegar
giafar ok fé-miklar. En es15 byscop sat í þeirre áhyggjo um son sínn,
ok um frétter aðrar hverso þá genge, þá gladde Goð hann svá á eino
sumre, at Loftr kom þá út með góðre virðingo ok fé-miklom giaofom,
es hann hafðe þeget; ok kunne þat at segja, at hann hefðe faoðor síns
mest noteð hvar sem hann kom.20

2. Á því sumre komo út goersemar þær es Þórer erki-byscop af Norege
hafðe sendar Póle byscope, córona goll-saumoð, [[143: 16.]] sú es enge
hafðe fyrr iam-góð komeð til Íslannz, fingr-goll dýrlegt ok glófar
virðoleger. En annat sumar efter, þá [1685] es Póll byscop hafðe
sextán vetr at stóle seteð í Scála-holte, þá kómo enn út goersemar
ágætlegar, es Nicholas byscop af Osló sende Póle byscope, fingr-goll
miket, es vá tvá aura, ok steinn í virðolegr: ok5 hann sende hónom
balsam svá mikenn, at ván vas at þat yrðe aldregi at vandræðom síðan;
en ecki vas annat iamn-toro-gætt es at skyldo þurfte at hafa; hafðe
þat ok kostað eige minna an nockorar merkr brennz silfrs.

3. Þess es ok skylt at geta, at Póll byscop sende ok margar10 giafar
útan sínom vinom; bæðe vóro þat valer, ok aðrar goersemar. Hann sende
Þóre erki-byscope byscops-staf af taonn goervan, svá haglega, at enge
maðr hafðe fyrr sét iam-vel goervan á Íslande, es smíðat hafðe Margret
en Haga, es þá vas odd-haogozt allra manna á Íslande. Þau vóro þá bæðe
hiú í Scála-holte es15 Póll byscop andaðesc, ok hafðe Þórer prestr,
bónde hennar, þar þá aoll fiár-forraóð; en hon goerðe slíkt allt
sem byscop [1686] vilde. Póll byscop hafðe láteð til taka at goera
tabolo fyrer altare, áðr hann skilðe við, ok ætlaðe þar til miket fé,
bæðe í golle ok silfre; ok Margrét gróf ok taonn til, ágæta vel; ok
es þess vaón, at þat munde20 en mesta goerseme verða, af fyrer-hyggjo
hans, en þau Þórsteinn scrín-smiðr ok Margrét semðe [1687] síðan af
hagleik sínom. Varð þat mikell svarta-svipr at hans frá-falle, at þá
urðo slíker hluter fyrst [[144: 17.]] staðar at nema í bráð, fyrer
annara fiol-skylda saker. Þórsteinn vas ráðenn til tabolo smíðar. Þat
sumar et sama, es byscop lifðe síðazt, kom út húfo-viðr or Norege,
sá es Póll byscop hafðe hoeggva láteð: ok þá gaf hann í haond aoll
kaup þau til staðarens, es at skylldo þurfte [1688] at hafa.5

4. Nú ero sagðer þeir hluter, es vel fello í hag á því sumre. Þá skal
ek geta þeirra hluta, es miok þótto and-streymer: þá varð land-skialfte
mikell enn næsta dag fyrer Seljo-manna-messo, ok léto marger menn líf
sítt; ok fell ofan al-hýse á fiolða boejom, ok goerðo ena stoersto
skaða. Þá var ok þerra-leyse et mesta, ok10 urðo stór-skaðar at [1689]
því. Þá vas ok sagt út andlát Kloengs Þórvallz sonar es enn vænzte
þótte til mikels haofðingja ef lífe hélde.

14. 1. Þat sumar tók sótt ok ó-hoegende mikel Póll byscop þá es
hann fór um Vestfirðinga-fiórðung, ok komsc hann nauðolega til
Hitar-dals; lá hann þar í reckjo nálega fiórar15 vicor; síðan fór
hann heim með lítlom mætte; ok kom heim í Scála-holt þrimr nóttom
fyrer Simons-messo; ok lagðesc þá þegar í reckjo. Hann soeng messo
Allra-Heilagra-messo-dag, ok soeng þá síðozto messo Goðe Almaótkom til
dýrðar ok aollom Helgom, en ser til hialpar ok miskunnar, ok aollom
Cristnom maonnom20 lifondom ok aondoðom. En fyrer Marteins-messo tók
at ó-hoegjasc [[145: 17.]] með verkjom miklom sótt hans, ok fylgðe
bæðe svefn-leyse ok mat-leyse; ok þótte hann þá einvænn [1690]
vesa. Þar vóro þá syner hans ok broeðr ok marger aðrer viner hans.

2. Efter þat sende Póll byscop efter Þórvalde ok Magnuse Gizorar sonom,
ok kómo þeir í Scála-holt, ok skipaðe hann þá til5 allra hluta fyrer
þeim, efter sínom vilja. En hann vas oleaðr octabo-dag Martini. En áðr
være smurðr helgo við-smioerve, mælte hann miok langt mál at doemom
ens helga Þorláks byscops: í átte hann þá á haond ser fyrer aollom
lærðom maonnom, þeirra es við vóro, freklega alla hlute, es hann
virðe sik hent hafa til varúðar10 í sínom byscopsdóme; ok bað alla,
at hónom skylde fyrer-gefa þat es hann hafðe mis-goert við þá. En
hann fyrer-gaf aollom blíðlega þat es við hann haofðo mis-goert;
ok fal sik under Goðs miskunn.

3. En efter þat vas hann oleaðr, ok [1691] vas nockot rén á hans
sótt15 unz hann fór af smurningar-klæðom, ok tvær nætr síðan. En
þá tók at élna [1692] ó-hoegende sóttar hans af nýjo; ok lifðe hann
þá eige lengr an tvær nætr síðan, ok tók hann þá Corpus Domini við
sialft andlát sítt; ok sofnaðe þá til Goðs.

4. En vico fyrer andlát Póls byscops sýndesc tungl svá sem20 roðra
være; ok gaf eige liós af ser um mið-nætte í heið-viðre; ok bauð þat
þá þegar mikla ógn maorgom manne.

5. Póll vas vígðr til byscops á daogom Celestinus pava af Ab­salone
[[145: 18.]] erki-byscope, á daogom Sverress konungs: þá vas
hann fer-toegr at aldre. Hann stýrðe Goðs Cristne með mikelle
stillingo sextán vetr, ok andaðesc þriðja dag vico, einne nótt fyrer
Andreas-messo. Ok vas þá liðet frá Goðs burð fiogor aór ens þrettánda
hundraðs.5

6. Are prestr enn Fróðe, es maorg doeme spakleg hefer saman-taolð,
seger hve miok várt land drúpðe [1693] efter frá-fall Gizoerar byscops,
es menn virðo mestan skaorung veret hafa á Íslande. En her má siá,
hverso margr kvíð-bióðr [1694] hefer faret fyrer frá-falle þessa ens
dýrlega haofðingja Póls byscops: iaorðen skalf aoll ok pipraðe af10
ótta; himinn ok skýen gréto, svá at mikell hlutr spilltesc iarðar
ávaxtarens; en himin-tunglen sýndo dauða-taókn ber [1695] á ser,
þá es nálega vas komet at enom oefstom lífs-stundom Póls byscops;
en siórenn brann ok fyrer landeno þá, þar sem hans byscopsdómr stóð
yfer. Sýndosc [1696] nálega allar haofoð-skepnor nockot hrygðar-mark
á15 ser sýna yfer [1697] hans frá-falle.

7. Ena síðosto nótt es Póll byscop lifðe, dreymðe Þórvald Gizoerar
son, enn vitrazta haofðingja, at Ioan Loftz son foele Petre Postola
á hende þá hiaorð, es Póll byscop sonr hans hafðe gætt: en Iesus
Christr fal sína hiaorð á hende [1698] Faoðor sínom áðr hann20 være
píndr, en Póll byscop fal sik ok hána [1699] á vald Almáttegs Goðs,
áðr órr faðer ok gætande vas frá oss kallaðr.


[[146 : 19.]]

15. 1. Nú má siá hvárn-tveggja stafn byscopsdóms þessa ens dýrlega
byscops; ok hyggjom ver á þeirre tíð hafe eige .... [1700] at siá
skut-stafnenn, es eige langaðe til at siá fram-stafnenn.

En við þat es oss at una hans ást-maonnom es efter lifom, at5 hann
hefer nálega aoll þau goeðe efter sik leift, es menn mego efter hafa
góðs mannz ok gaofogs: baorn virðoleg með góðom efnom til skaða-bóta
þeim, es mest niðr-fall es orðet í andláte Póls byscops; auðr gnógr,
ok allz-kyns staðar-prýðe, flest framm komen, en sum stofnoð með góðom
efnom; heilræðe hans með kenningom, þeim10 es hann kennde í sí-fello
í orðom ok faogrom doemom síns lífs; auðræðe ok unaz-vister [1701], es
hann ætlaðe vel flestom sínom naónom frændom. En hann mon til þess hogt
hafa at Goð mone þá hugga, es hann hefer eige einkom [1702] fé huggaða.

En þessa saogo mína styrkðe vitr maðr, Ámunde Arna son smiðr15 Póls
byscops, ok kveðr vísor þessar:



    Réð Goðs laga greiðer (góð var stiórn yfer þióðom)
    sextán vetr enn snotre, sólar, byscops-stóle:
    Nú er mein-baonnoðr manna mál-sniallr heðan kallaðr
    (Kome Póll í frið fullan fliótt) með himna Dróttne,20
    Dáð-hitter gat Dróttens dýrr Goðs [1703] laogom stýra
    (sætt [1704] bió sann-vinr rétta) sextán vetr til betra
    hyggjom hitt at segja, hialp-ríkom vel líka
    gagn vann af hug creinom hans aonn Goðe ok maonnom. [1705]
    [[147: 20.]] Lýðr á allr fyr eyðe oer-sætes við Goð mætan,
    Þeim er goerðe frið fyrða, far-sælom vel mæla:
    Boenom brátt at skíne blíð-geðr hæfoð-feðra
    Þeim es ýta baol boeter, byscop órr, með córa.



2. Þá sextán vetr, es Goðs Cristne prýddesc under blóma5 byscopsdóms
Póls byscops, urðo maorg stór-tíðende í heimenom: þá andaðesc
Celestinus Páve; Absalon erki-byscop: Sverrer konungr, Hákon, Gothormr
Noregs konungar: Knútr, Soerkver Svia konungar; Ríkarðr Engla konungr:
Niall byscop; Brandr byscop; Ioan byscop: Haraldr iarl í Orkneyjom;
Philippus iarl:10 Einarr ábóte Márs son; Goðmundr Bialfa son ábóte;
Hafliðe ábóte Þórvallz son; Þórkell ábóte Skúms son.

Marger hafa ok aðrer gaofger menn andasc meðan Póll byscop vas,
bæðe lærðer menn ok ó-lærðer: Ioan Loptz son; Gizoerr Hallz son;
Sigmundr Orms son; Þórleifr Þorláks son; Þórvaldr Þórkels son;15 Kalfr
Snorra son; Are Biarnar son; Onundr Þórkels son; Hermundr Coðrans son;
Þórðr Snorra son; Goðmundr Ámunda son; Berse prestr Halldórs son.

Ok mart varð annat til tíðenda í hans byscopsdóme: skipa-tión; ok
ellz upp-kváma í Heklo-felle; ó-friðr, rán, ok brennor; ok með20
maorgom fa-tíðendom líflát manna.


[Epilogue.]

3. Nú hefe-ek yfer faret nockvot með skyndingo æve Póls byscops; ok
hefer mer meirr til [1706] genget ú-koenska an illvile, þó at [[148:
20.]] þesse frá-saga sé eige iamn-merkileg orðen, sem hann hafðe efne
til sett af sínne haolfo.

Gleðe Goð Almáttogr hann í sí-fello í eilífre dýrð. Amen.






The Life of Bishop Paul.

1. 1. Paul was the son of that most noble man John, the son of Loft,
the son of Sæ-mund the historian. John's mother was Thora, daughter
of king Magnus Barefoot; and Paul's mother was Rag-neid, daughter of
Thor-hall, and sister of Saint Thor-lac the bishop. Paul was brought
up in Ord with John his father, and he himself, and others also,
ever held him [Paul] in greater esteem the elder he grew.

2. Paul was a goodly man to look on, fair-eyed and steady-eyed,
curly-haired and fair-haired, well-limbed and small-footed,
bright-coloured and fair-skinned, a man of middle stature, and of all
men most courtly of carriage. He was quick and well learned when he was
young, and skilful at everything he did, both writing and other things.

3. He married young, taking to wife Herdis Cetil's daughter, a fair
woman, and of good skill in all that should adorn a lady.

4. But when they had been a winter together Paul went abroad, and
became the man of Harold, earl in the Orkneys, who held him in great
esteem. And afterwards he went south to England, and was there at
school, and got great learning there, so that there was scarce any
example of any man having got so deep and so much knowledge in the
like time. And so when he came back to Iceland, he surpassed all other
men in his courtliness and his learning, and in making of [Latin]
verse, and in book-lore. He was also so great a singer and musician
that his song and voice excelled those of all other men that were
living in his day.

5. At this time he went back again to stay at Ord, and there he was
ever in great favour, as was his due. But a little later Paul set
up housekeeping at Scard, but at first there was but little of all
that was needed, but the wise husbandry of both husband and wife,
and the good-will and help of their friends, stood them in such good
stead that within a short time they had plenty of everything. Yet
they met with very great losses of stock; but they took it all well
and bravely, and indeed it was soon as if there had been none, for
their stock increased as fast as the flood-tide coming up the shore.

6. Paul was trusty and of few words, and affable to all his friends
and all good men, but he was strict with all wicked men, thieves
and evil men, a great controller over everything in his district,
and prompt to help in all that needed his presence.

7. Paul was a priest-hood's man or gode, and he upheld his moot-men
in all righteous cases, so that they always got the better therein.

8. Paul had four children, that grew up out of childhood, by Herdis his
wife, two sons and two daughters; his sons were named Loft and Cetil,
and his daughters Halla and Thora. They were all goodly to look on,
and grew up of good parts.

9. Bishop Thor-lac, Paul's mother's brother, held him in great esteem,
and loved him much, and often asked him to his house. But though
some other chiefs were adverse or refractory to bishop Thor-lac,
Paul was the more trusty and fully faithful to him the more others
forsook him. And when bishop Thor-lac died Paul showed his loving
friendliness to him more than all his noble friends.


2. 1. Next summer after the death of Saint Thor-lac the bishop,
Paul was chosen bishop, but there was a very long debate over the
matter; but at last it came to this, that the matter should be
put to bishop Brand, chiefly by the counsel of Hall Gizor's son,
and he chose Paul to go out [and be hallowed bishop]. But he [Paul]
did not soon consent to undertake the charge, and one after another
went to ask him, bishop Brand and also his brothers, and others of
his dearest friends, but he refused, and so went home from the Moot.

2. Then he went to the church-day [Dedication-day] at Ord on
Seliamen's-mass [July 8, 1194] with great concern of mind. But when
all had now ceased from asking him, and he saw when he thought over
what was to be done that there was none left to contend with him,
unless he wished to withstand God's will,--and this he surely did
not wish to do,--at this moment the Holy Ghost cast it into his mind
to put himself under this burden for the sake of others' needs, and
with that he boldly undertook the charge which his mind had so long
set him against doing.

3. And a little after this he went to Scal-holt, and John, his father,
and his brothers with him, and at once took over all the stewardship
of the bishopstead there. And straightway he asked Gizor Hall's son
to abide there, for he had been there in the days of Saint Thor-lac
the bishop, and was the greatest ornament to the see and the greatest
furtherance to the estate thereof of all them that were there. Paul
let all the managership in Scal-holt go on in the same way as it had
done before, but he set priest Thor-kel Hall's son to take care of the
church, and he was his first chaplain when he came out [to Iceland],
but he afterwards became canon of Wer [Thickby].

4. Herdis took care of the homestead at Scard, and of all their
children, and of all that belonged to them, in goodly and seemly wise
as long as he was abroad, and it was said by all, that no children
were so well brought up as their children in the whole hundred: and all
this kept its shape as long as she was alive, for she was of all women
the most scrupulous both for herself and others, as was often proved.


3. 1. Paul went abroad the same summer that he was chosen bishop,
and he was at that time in deacon's orders. He had a fair voyage till
he came to Norway, and then he went to the Chipping or market-town
at Niths-oyce [Nidaros], and was there through the winter until Yule
passed ... and of those he met there that man thought he did best
who did most to pay him honour and respect, and this the rather the
nobler the man was [who entertained him], and in this they did rightly.

2. Archbishop Eiric was in Denmark when Paul came out to be
consecrated, and he was staying there with archbishop Absalom, but king
Swerre-Magnus was east in Wick, whence he went to the Uplands. But
after Yule Paul and his following went from the north out of the
Chipping or market-town to see the king, and with him there came
many of the king's men. And the king received him as well as if he
had been his son or brother, and gave him as much rank and honour as
he himself or his friends could ever have wished for, and the reason
of this was both because the king saw better into men than other men
could, and because he had better means to do as he wished, and he
put forth all that was of the best to do most honour to both of them.

3. Bishop Thore ordained Paul priest in Hammer-chipping. It was
in the Ember-days in Lent one night after Matthias-mass [Feb. 26],
and afterward he went back to the king the same night, and he abode
with him till he went to Denmark; and the king provided everything
that he seemed to have need of for his journey. Moreover the king
got all the bishops that were in the country to give him a letter
with their seals. Then he went to Denmark about Lent, and came to
Lund on the first day of Pasch [Easter] to see the archbishop, and,
as soon as he was come, Absalom asked him to stay with him, with the
greatest honour, and waited for him at the high mass when he knew
that he was about to come.

4. He was there with the archbishops through Easter-week, and was held
in the greatest honour by them both; and counsel was taken forthwith
for his consecration, for they soon got proof of what a paragon he was,
both for learning and wisdom and accomplishments. And he waited for
his consecration in the monastery that is called Herads-wade, but he
was hallowed earlier than the time they had fixed when they parted,
and the chief cause of this was that king Cnut Waldemar's son sent
word that they should further his journey, as it would suit him best
and those whom he was to be bishop over. And this went of a piece
with his other luck, that such a noble person should honour him so
greatly though he had not seen him, as to give the very counsel as
he himself would have wished should be given.

5. Archbishop Absalom hallowed Paul bishop on the day of bishop John
[April 23], eight nights before Philip and James' mass, by the counsel
of archbishop Eiric, who had not then himself the sight needful
to hallow him. The bishops that were at Paul's consecration were
archbishop Eiric, and Peter bishop of Roes-keld. Bishop Paul gave a
gold ring to archbishop Absalom, and another to bishop Eiric, and to
all the others that took part at his consecration and advancement to
the dignity of bishop some treasure or other. Celestine was pope when
bishop Paul was consecrated. Bishop Paul was forty years old when he
was consecrated bishop.

6. Afterwards he went to Norway, and met king Swerre, east in Wick,
and went with him to Beorg-win [Bergen], and was with him until
he went to Iceland the same summer, and the king honoured him ever
the more in all ways, the longer he was with him and the better he
knew him. All men held him in great esteem, as was to be looked for,
and his kinsmen were all the most noble men in the whole country.


4. 1. Bishop Paul went out to Iceland the same summer that he had been
hallowed bishop, and came to Ey-frith, and there he gave a costly feast
to bishop Brand and other of his friends whom he could get there,
with wine to drink, and ale, and all the other meat and drink, of
the best that could be. And it was then shown forthwith at the first,
as was often proved afterwards, that he was ever best pleased when he
was cheering his friends as many as he could gather and his kinsfolk
in worshipful entertainment with love and magnificence.

2. He brought home with him two glass-windows to give to the church
at Scal-holt, to his ghostly spouse; and so he showed at once, which
afterwards appeared still more, what was in his mind, how much he
wished to adorn the church to which he was consecrated more than
it ever was before, though even before it was the finest and most
precious of all that were in Iceland.

3. This was the first honour that bishop Paul paid his see and his
church, which no bishop as yet had ever done, to wit, he sung no mass
before he came to his see in Scal-holt, but in all lands it is esteemed
that it is as good for a man to hear a new-made priest's first mass
as it is to hear an every-day bishop's mass; but how much better must
this have been seeing it was the first mass of a priest and a bishop
at once. And many men gathered to Scal-holt at those glad tidings to
hear bishop Paul's first mass. There were many noble men that stood
and heard him, John Loftsson his father, Sæ-mund and Orm his brethren,
and Gizor Hall's son, and there was a great gathering there then. The
bishop spoke a long and fair discourse, and he promised at once,
what was a most welcome thing to most men, that he would ordain all
the ordinances which bishop Thor-lac had ordained.

4. This also was manifest at once, when he began to go progresses
through his diocese, how blithe and cheerful he was to all under
him, and how easily he was satisfied with regard to all that was
his due, both the hospitality or other things which were due to his
position. And thereby he became so beloved by the whole commonalty,
that well-nigh every man held him most dear, both they that were in
his diocese and no less they that were of the other diocese. It was
also easy to see how rich a man he would become, by reason of his
prudence and good management in every thing and way.

5. Bishop Paul had been one winter in Scal-holt before Herdis, his
wife, came thither to take over the management of all within doors,
and she was such a prop and stay there, both as regards the bishopstead
and himself, as no other among men was, as long as he was [bishop]
in the see. So great was her skill in business that before she had
been more than a few winters there there was plenty of everything
that was needed, and there was no need to go a-begging for anything,
though there were one hundred persons on the estate, and [of these]
about seventy or eighty servants.


5. 1. Bishop Paul soon saw this when he came to the see of Scal-holt,
that it would be needful for him to keep up and strengthen and finish
a certain thing which the holy bishop Thor-lac had shown to be his
will, and towards which he had begun to buy. And this was to provide
for the church-bells which Thor-lac had bought for the bishopstead
in Scal-holt, and which were the best in all Iceland. He had also got
out from abroad with the bells four beams twenty ells long by measure.

2. For this end bishop Paul then got him the man who was the best
carpenter in all Iceland, whose name was Amund Arne's son, and he
had a bell-house or steeple made so beautifully wrought, both in its
material and in its workmanship, that it carried it over all other
wooden buildings in Iceland, no less than the church itself had done
before. He had a church made in the upper floor of the steeple,
and a staircase to go up thereto, and he hallowed this church to
Saint Thor-lac the bishop on the tenth day of Yule, and furnished
the church fairly in every way, putting into it everything that
was needed therefore. He let priest Atle the scribe [illuminator]
paint all the roof inside the steeple and the gable end, and hang
it all below with three hangings well and fairly, and over each of
the tombs of them that were buried in the steeple he let write who
they were that rested there. He laid out no less money in building
this steeple, as far as he could bethink himself, than 400 pieces of
silver or somewhat more. He bought the bells that were in the steeple,
and were the greatest treasures of their size, from a Northern man
whose name was Col. He bought moreover other bells for the steeple,
two of them being those of the same tone, that are above the church,
and he adorned in every way that he could devise, both the church
and the steeple, with every kind of furniture, tablets and crosses,
and books, and images, and lamps, and glass-windows, and all kinds
of bishops' vestments. He also had a noble stone coffin cunningly
hewn, wherein he was laid after his death, and he had a crypt made
in worshipful fashion in the steeple, for those men whom he thought
most closely bound to him.


6. 1. In the third year of bishop Paul's bishopric, his father, John
Loftsson, died on All-hallow-day [Nov. 1, 1197], the man who was then
the noblest chief in all Iceland. He felt it to be a great blow to
him--the loss of the man who was most able to raise and strengthen
his dignity, and was the most bound of all men so to do.

2. But Almighty God, who ever let his happiness and good fortune wax
day after day and never grow less, took such care of his renown that
no man before in Iceland hath ever received equal honour and dignity
from his kinsmen as he got there from his near kinsman bishop Thor-lac
the Saint, because it was in his days that his glory and saintliness
were shown forth, first in the north-country and afterwards over all
Iceland and all other lands that were near. But, though bishop Paul
was more glad than any one else of these tidings, he carried himself
so carefully in the matter that he would have the vote of all the
chiefs and the wisest men before him in dealing with this matter;
and there was not wanting a report among some men, that he did not
want the matter of the saintliness of the blessed bishop Thor-lac to
get abroad. But he acted as he did, because he wished to give God the
glory, that he had let that come about in his days the like of which
had never happened, and because he wished the matter to be so carried
that there might be most hope of God's approval. He thought it to
be a matter of difficulty as it was, to set the matter going with a
lofty balance, and that there might be found nothing blameworthy in
its treatment, but no one believed earlier nor forwarded more than he
did the glory and saintliness of the blessed bishop Thor-lac, though
he walked more warily than other men [with regard to it]. Nevertheless
it was the opinion of all the wisest men, according to the message of
bishop Brand, that the relics of bishop Thor-lac should be translated
this summer according as he had himself foretold in a manifest vision
of Thor-ward the priest's the Yule next before this.

3. After the Moot the same summer that this was decided upon, bishop
Paul sent word to bishop Brand, and to his brethren Sæ-mund and
Orm, and to the sons of Gizor Hall's son, Thor-wald and Magnus,
and to Thor-laf Thorlaksson of Hot-dale the mother's father of
Herdis, to Cetil her son, to Thor-lac Cetil's son Herdis' brother,
to priest God-mund Are's son, who was later bishop of Holar, and to
many others of his dearest friends. For them that came bishop Paul
prepared a costly feast, and afterwards there were taken up out of
the earth the relics of the blessed bishop Thor-lac, and bestowed
withal as worshipfully as beseemed it, according to the foresight and
provision of bishop Paul, and straightway there followed mighty tokens,
as it is told in his [Saint Thor-lac's] Life, and the glory was his,
but the good-hap was bishop Paul's.

4. The next summer after [1199] the mass-day of bishop Thor-lac was
made law throughout the whole land, and a two days' fast ordained
withal. After this men sought thither out of all the country to do
reverence to the blessed bishop Thor-lac with vigils and fasts, and
prayers and gifts, and thither too sought they that were travellers,
many every season, both aliens and Icelanders, and paid their vows
there that they had vowed, and gave into bishop Paul's hands, and told
him every man the cause of his vow, and the token that they received
in return, and this was ever glad tidings to him. They all carried
away with them true proofs of the saintliness and glory of the blessed
bishop Thor-lac and the hospitality and magnificence of bishop Paul.

5. But though the renown of bishop Paul was great as was deserved,
before the saintship of bishop Thor-lac was mooted, it made his repute
still higher in that he had a mother's brother of true nobility, and
many looked for the old saw to come true, that 'a man takes after his
mother's brother.' And there were many tokens that it would be so,
because he did in many things just as the blessed bishop Thor-lac
had done. He was careful in his life and an observer of the offices,
he mortified himself with fasts and with regard to raiment, he had
moreover a touch of all those things which he could find out that the
blessed bishop Thor-lac had in his behaviour, lowly and an almsgiver,
living plainly and long-suffering, as in both [him and his foregoer]
was proved by trials many and great during their bishoprics.

6. When bishop Paul thought that sufficient money had been gathered
and brought together, of that which men gave out of their goodwill
to the blessed bishop Thor-lac, then he quickly made manifest what
he had made ready in his mind to do. He hired that goldsmith, whose
name was Thor-stan, and who was the most skilful worker in metal of
all Iceland. And so abundant were the bishop's supplies that there
was no lack of anything that was needful for the work which he wished
to have wrought.

He let a shrine be wrought, and furnished therefore abundantly moneys
in gold and gem-stones and burnt silver. He laid out no less money
upon the shrine and the hire of the smiths, with the contributions
of other men, than four hundred pieces of silver. This shrine was so
beautifully wrought, that it no less excelled all other shrines that
were in Iceland in beauty than it did in size, and it was more than
three ells long, and there was no other longer than an ell of all
those that were then in Iceland. No wise man who sees this shrine
can question how magnificent a man he must have been who could have
had this treasure made, or what wealth he must have had to have begun
such a work.


7. 1. In the days of bishop Paul there came out of Green-land bishop
John, and he abode the winter through in East-frith, and then came to
Scal-holt at the end of Lent to the bishop Paul; and he came thither
on Shear-[Thurs]day [April 3, 1203], and both the bishops hallowed
much anointing oil or crisma, and they held many confidential talks
and laid wise plans between them. Bishop Paul received him with the
greatest honour, and gave him a worshipful feast while he was there,
and led him on his way with great magnificence, both in gifts and
other marks of honour. Bishop John taught men how to make wine out of
crow-berries, according as king Swerre had told him. And it happened
the next summer [1203] after there were berries almost everywhere
in Iceland; and a man, whose name was Eiric, who dwelt a short way
from Scal-holt at the homestead that is called Snorre's-stead, made
some wine out therefrom, and it turned out well. But that very summer
bishop John went to Norway and thence to Rome, and everywhere he came
he spoke highly of the hospitality and dignity of bishop Paul.

2. In the days of bishop Paul, when Gizor Hall's son held the
Law-speakership, there arose very much unrighteous dealing as to
the ell, both among aliens and Icelanders, so that men thought it
not to be borne any longer. Then bishop Paul gave this counsel in
the matter, that men were to have for a measure sticks or yards two
ells length. Then other chiefs lent their might with the bishop to
the forwarding of this measure, Gizor and his sons, Thor-wald and
Hall and Magnus, as well as his brothers, Sæ-mund, who was then the
most noble man in all Iceland, and Orm, who was both a good lawyer
and skilled in most other knowledge, and all the chiefs, and it was
then made law as it hath been maintained ever since.

3. In the seventh year of the bishopric of bishop Paul, Absalom,
archbishop in Denmark, died on Bennet's-day [March 21, 1201], and in
the same year bishop Brand died on Sextus-day [Aug. 6], and he had
been bishop eight winters of the fourth ten [38], and was a great
paragon. After the death of bishop Brand, the North-countrymen chose
for bishop priest God-mund Are's son, and bishop Paul gave him his writ
to archbishop Eiric, and God-mund was hallowed bishop in Thrond-ham
ten nights before bishop John's-mass [April 13, 1203], and Hacon,
son of king Swerre, was then king in Norway. Bishop God-mund came
back to Iceland the same summer and came to East-frith, and then
bishop Paul and he met, and they paid each other much honour in feasts
and gifts. Then bishop God-mund went to Holar, and sat there in his
see with the greatest discomforts on many accounts. His means soon
became small, but the outgoings were hardly deemed moderate. And all
that came in the way with him, held him rather stern and stiff in his
commands. But bishop Paul waxed ever in love and friendship with the
whole commonalty of the land, as men saw his prudence in everything,
and his easiness in what he required and commanded to all that were
in obedience to him; and all the people of the land would fain have
had such a governor over them if they could have had their choice.

4. Bishop Paul had the number of the churches taken, that there was
need of priests for, in the three Quarters of the country over which
he was bishop, and he had the priests numbered, how many there were
needed in his diocese. And there were two hundred and twenty churches,
ten-told, and there were needed of priests ten less than three hundred,
ten-told. And he had them numbered for this reason, that he wished to
give priests leave to go abroad if there were enough left behind in
his diocese, and he wished also to provide, if need were, that there
should be no lack of priests in his diocese as long as he was bishop.

5. In the twelfth year of the bishopric of bishop Paul there came
to pass these tidings which were of great concern. There died Gizor
Hall's son two nights before Olave's-mass [July 27, 1206]. Of him
spake Sæ-mund Paul's brother these words, that he was 'a rook or
cornerstone of all merriment wherever he was present.'

6. Then also three nights before Ambrose-day the following winter
[Dec. 4, 1206] there came up fire [was an eruption] in Hecla-fell
for the third time.


8. 1. Bishop Paul was such a fortunate man, that well-nigh everything
went sun-wise [happily] with him in the earlier part of his life;
and [this also he had] as may be heard in some degree in the [body or
hull] of this story, I have told above, and there is nothing therein
but what is true, that he became, as it were, the idol or teraph of
all men. And Almighty God blessed him the more the longer he lived
both in wealth and honour.

But if any one should think that, for love's sake, I have adorned
the story of the life of bishop Paul more than there was any ground
for, they do not guess right, for this rather sticks in my mind,
that I have left out many notable things in the story of his life,
by reason of lack of knowledge or by carelessness and laziness in
writing, rather than that I have lied a whit in my story.

2. This happy plan moreover bishop Paul took up, when men suffered
stress of bad seasons, and lacked crops and fish and most other winter
provision, whereby there came about first a lack of food for beasts
and afterwards for men,--then he took this counsel, by the good-will
of Thor-wald Gizor's son and other wise men of his fellowship,
to vow to God and the saints for bettering of the seasons, to sing
three Pater-nosters every day to the glory of God and the memory of
Saint Thor-lac the bishop, and on his day in the summer to give at the
morning-meal the milk of his sheep and a bundle of hay from each cow's
fodder, and a mark or half-pound out of each half-hundred weight [to
the poor]; and there came never any famine more as long as he lived.


9. 1. But inasmuch as God will not always try them whom He loveth
with indulgence only, but will rather by temptation and trials make
His servants perfect, if they stand fast, as there have been many
ensamples:--

2. Now when bishop Paul was shining in such bloom that his worth and
wealth were ever increasing, and Herdis was gathering in all kinds of
things with her husbandry and prudence, which the estate stood in need
of, with all the stewardship that was needful; for she was the most
notable housewife in all those matters of business that there was a
call for upon the estate at home or at any other of the homesteads that
the bishop owned: their children became at once in their young years
skilful: Loft in handicraft and learning and wisdom, Cetil in skill
and handwriting, Halla in working and book-lore, Thora in obedience
and love. Now inasmuch as God speaketh thus in the Gospel, that
anything that is said shall be established by two or three witnesses
[John viii. 17], I will set forth with one the testimony of A-mund
the Smith, who was a man both of rule and truth. He made this verse--


    God magnifies Loft with the highest gift, there is no stint
    therefrom,
    And the King of the Moon increases Cetil's estate by his power,
    And the Lord of all bestows a most blissful life on the Halla,
    And the dear Prince of the Archangels makes Thora thrive mightily.


        [See Corpus Poet. Bor. ii. 282.]


So it went with them ever in their life till the day that they were
visited by misfortune.


10. 1. Now when bishop Paul had been at his see twelve winters
[1207], it happened that Herdis went from home in the spring after
Easter to Scard, to a homestead the bishop had there, and she was
going to get servants and busy herself with other matters that were
needful there. Two of her children, Cetil and Halla, went with her,
but Loft and Thora were at home with the bishop.

But when Herdis was at Scard there came a great flood, and the river
Steer-water or Theorso could not be ridden. But she wished to get home
at the day she had named, because there was much at home unsettled,
which it was meant should wait her coming. So she had a boat got and
taken to the river, and they went down to the boat--Herdis, Cetil,
and Halla, and John Herdis' brother, and a priest named Beorn chaplain
of the bishop that served them, Sig-fus Grimsson the priest, a deacon
of Scard named Thor-stan, Gud-run Thor-odd's daughter and Herdis'
sister's daughter. Cetil and Beorn went across the river first, their
horses and harness, and Herdis' riding horse was lost then. The last
time, when they were to cross, there were on board the boat, Sig-fus
Grimsson, Thor-stan the deacon, Herdis, and Halla and Gud-run, and
the weather was somewhat squally. And when they got into the current,
and were a short way from the shore they were about to go over to,
they foundered, and the boat sunk under them, and they all went to the
bottom, and all came up again, and both mother and daughter were heard
to chaunt and commend themselves and their souls to God Almighty's
hand. And there they that were to die, and they that were to live,
parted: Sig-fus was driven ashore, but Herdis, Halla, and Gud-run were
drowned, and Thor-stan the deacon; but Sig-fus was much spent when
he came ashore, but there was no man ashore that gave any help to them.

But Almighty God fulfilled all His promises, He that hath promised
that He would 'give comfort with every grief,' and that 'He would
try no one more [heavily] than he could bear' [by that which He lays
upon him] [1 Cor. x. 13]. And God showed this in both ways in the
grievous mishap, for comfort came with grief, in that all the bodies
of them that were drowned were found the same day, and this comfort
was very great to them that survived, and yet it was little likely
[that it could have happened], save God of His goodness and grace had
granted it, for there was such a great flood, that a few nights later
the horse that had drowned there was driven up on the West-men-isles.

2. But when these tidings came to the ear of bishop Paul suddenly
at the dead of night, then it was manifest to all that God had
measured close what he could bear. He could not taste any food, and
could get no sleep before the bodies were buried, though he tried
to cheer up as much as he could. But yet any one may tell what a
trial he had, to have lost so grievously the persons he loved best,
and to see sorrow continually in his children and in all those that
he had to care for. He did all that had to be done for the dead with
composure, both as regards fees to the clerks and also to the poor,
for he perceived this, which is true enough, that in such matters
'a sinking plow [i.e. deep plow] is better than a swaying one.'

3. The anniversary of Herdis and them that lost their lives with her
is fourteen nights after the Invocation of the Cross in the spring
[May 17, 1207]. And it was many men's duty, both clerk and lay, to
remember her [pray for her soul] as warmly and lovingly as their
nearest kinswoman, because of her many housewifely charities [on
their behalf].

4. Bishop Paul gave great comfort to Thor-lac Herdis' brother, both
in words and in munificent gifts which he gave him, and held him with
no less esteem than before he lost her; the bishop cared for Thor-lac
no less than for his own children after her death.

Thora, bishop Paul's daughter, took the management of all indoors after
the death of her mother, with the loving supervision of her father,
though she was no older than fourteen years of age; and she carried
all on so well that they that were best acquainted with her ways of
management esteemed them the best.

The bishop so soon got the better of the grief that he had suffered,
that many men thought there was little trace of it to be seen in
him: and yet every one can clearly understand that it was more his
long-suffering and his wish to appear cheerful to the people than
because his sorrow ever went out of his heart as long as he lived.


11. 1. Bishop Paul would seldom, in comparison with the former ways,
save it were a high-day, preach a sermon, for he thought that they
would care more for it if they could seldom get it; but he had two
masses sung well-nigh every holiday, he himself preached a sermon
four days every twelve-month, the first day of Yule, and the first
Wednesday of the Fast [Ash-Wednesday], Shear-[Thurs]day, and the day
of the [dedication of the] church, and only on any other day when he
thought there was some need [to say somewhat].

And I put this down for this reason, that other most scrupulous and
careful men have done likewise, and it is the greatest good for them
that shall come afterward, that they may know as many ensamples as
possible of such men's doings, for there is good to be got out of all.

At every place where he took quarters he himself made a discourse,
or set another to do so, when he was holding his visitation in any
part of his diocese.

2. Several men were his chaplains; first the priest Thor-kel Hall's
son, a good clerk and upright man, for some winters, until he entered
the Order of Canons. After that priest Leg served him seven winters;
and afterwards a North-countryman called Beorn, a man of small
stature but wise and well-learned, and a foster-son of bishop Brand;
afterwards he went abroad. After that priest Brand Dale's son served
him, who had before served bishops Brand and God-mund. Priest Cetil
Her-mund's son was also his servant [chaplain] before he died, and he
took care of the choir of the cathedral and the clerks there after the
loss of bishop Paul. The former bishops let the same chaplains serve
them all through, each of them, that they might show the steadfastness
and evenness of their temper in this as in much else. But why bishop
Paul changed his chaplains was, because he thought it better that
many should get rank and honour from him, and each man was in good
esteem while he served him whatever might happen afterward.


12. 1. At the time Herdis died, the case of the Northlanders between
bishop God-mund and Colban Tumesson began to get troublesome, and as
is well known, all the men in this country gat great distress through
these troubles. But bishop Paul bore the brunt of these troubles
before any one else ..., not before in the Northlanders Quarter. And
he was in such troublesome position or sore stress in this matter,
because the archbishop had sent him his letter with his seal that he
should stay and strengthen, as far as his power would go, the side
of bishop God-mund, while many dear friends of bishop Paul supported
the side of Colban and kinsmen and relations of his own to whom he
wished to show loving kindness withal, yet he could do nothing. But
it was no easy thing to make these matters right, inasmuch as bishop
God-mund did not think himself upheld, unless bishop Paul stood in
the forefront with him, and he defied both men and the laws of the
land, and interdicted and excommunicated every one that would do
anything against his will. But Paul was oftentimes a patient man,
even though all was not done as he wished and as he saw it ought to
be, and in this way he brought many to good fruit towards himself
and God, and to others he gave gentle penances. Nevertheless they
could not bear always to be in wrong; but bishop God-mund did not
pay any more regard to those men that were in Paul's diocese, but
interdicted them and excommunicated them as soon as they gave any
judgment that was not to his mind, even though it were the lawful
judgment. But bishop Paul would not let these sentences bite men
[deep], but yet would lay upon them some small penance, for the safety
sake of those that came under or were inmeshed in God-mund's cause,
for Paul liked rather that those under his charge should undergo some
[slight penance] rather than sit in terror as to whether the bishop's
sentence might take effect in them or not.

2. But when the troubles ran so high that there was a battle wherein
Colban and many other good men, both clerk and lay, fell [Sept. 9,
1208], and they that survived lost their [friends]. And after that
the bishop and his men made an attack upon the survivors and the
next-of-kin to Colban, and drove them away and took to themselves
all that they had, and declared them to be under excommunication. But
when bishop Paul knew and was aware of these tidings, he prayed his
friends not to make an attack upon them at once, and his reason was
that he knew [the old saw] that 'the blood-nights are the hottest,'
and he hoped that this saw would be proved, and expected that matters
would go more calmly and reasonably if they waited longer. And he hoped
on the other side that bishop God-mund would see the flaw in his work
and how much harm had come of it, and would make good offers of peace
and honour to those that had the suits for the slain. But when this
[hope] was disappointed, and there came news on the contrary of attacks
against them, and robberies and assaults and well-nigh every kind of
outrage, then Paul sent his chaplain Beorn to see bishop God-mund,
and ask him to make amends and allay these troubles with ..., offering
to support him as thoroughly therein as was needed with good-will and
his own means, in whatever way he could by money or other outlay, if
he would only meet him half-way. It was manifest ... the way bishop
Paul had by his words hindered the chiefs from going north, first
at harvest-tide while men's grief was the greatest and least abated
the pain of the loss of men ...; and then it was proposed to bishop
God-mund that he should grant to his noble and good kinsmen some
easy amends for what they had suffered than they had, for he wished
to snatch God-mund and his followers out of instant jeopardy while
yet it was possible. But bishop God-mund would not listen to it, and
charged him with leaning towards the chiefs in making such proposals.

But it was soon made manifest which of the two had most wisdom and
prudence in this, because in the same year the chiefs went to Holar
[April 15, 1209], and drove bishop God-mund out of his see, and
swept away that crowd of rascalry that was encamped there--outlaws
and robbers and reavers, and slew some, and thereby that gang of
malefactors was broken up, and thenceforward men had good luck
[and peace].

Bishop Paul, with gentleness and good-will, asked bishop God-mund to
come and stay with him, but he would not, and took great care not to
meet him because he would not listen to his wholesome counsel.


13. 1. At that time Loft, the son of bishop Paul, went abroad, and went
to the homes of men of rank in their lands, to Bearne bishop of the
Orkneys, and after to king Inge in Norway, and earl Hacon his brother,
and from them he received worshipful gifts and much money. But as the
bishop sat in much concern about his son and other news how things were
going, God gladdened him so that one summer Loft came back with good
renown and rich gifts that he had received, and he was able to say that
he had got a good welcome for his father's sake wherever he had been.

2. In that summer came thither [to Iceland] the treasures which Thore
archbishop of Norway had sent to bishop Paul, a gold embroidered mitre,
such as none as good had ever come to Iceland, a costly gold ring,
and splendid gloves. But the next summer after, when bishop Paul had
sat sixteen winters in the see of Scal-holt, there came out noble
treasures which Nicholas, bishop of Oslo, sent to bishop Paul, a great
finger-ring of gold that weighed two ounces, and a noble stone in it;
and he sent him so much balm, that it looked as if there would never be
any difficulty about the supply thereof any more, for there was nothing
else so difficult to get among those things which it was necessary to
have, and this could have cost no less than many marks of burnt silver.

3. It is also needful to put down, that bishop Paul also sent out
many gifts to his friends, both hawks and other treasures. He sent
archbishop Thore a bishop's staff, wrought out of tusk-ivory so
skilfully that no man had ever seen one so well carven in Iceland as
this which Margaret the Skilful had made, who was then the most skilful
carver of all folk in Iceland. These two, both she and her husband
Thore who was the steward, were both in Scal-holt when bishop Paul
died, and she used to do whatever work the bishop set her to do. Bishop
Paul had put in hand and had her begin a tabula [or reredos] for the
altar before he died, and had meant to spend on it much money, both
gold and silver, and Margaret carved it most nobly out of tusk-ivory,
and this would have been the greatest jewel or masterpiece if,
according to his plan, both Thor-stan the shrine-maker and Margaret
had wrought it out with their craft. But his death was a big black
blow, and such things had to be put off for the sake of many other
things that had to be done. Thor-stan was appointed to make the tabula.

That same summer, when the bishop was last alive, there came out from
Norway timber for a [turret] cap, which bishop Paul had had hewn,
and at that time he paid for all the commodities that were needed
for the bishopstead.

4. Now are told those things which fell out well this summer, but I
will now put down those things which were held to be very much against
the stream. There was that great earthquake the next day after the
Selia-men's-mass [July 8, 1211], whereby many folks lost their life,
and there fell down whole houses on many homesteads, and the greatest
damage was done. There was also the greatest lack of dry weather, and
much damage was done thereby [1211]. The news of Clong Thor-wald's
son's death were also brought out, who was held to bid most fair to
be a great chief if his life lasted.


14. 1. That summer bishop Paul fell into sickness and disease,
when he was going through the West-frith-men's Quarter, and with
difficulty he reached Hot-dale. There he lay in bed well-nigh four
weeks, afterwards he set out for home with little strength, coming
home to Scal-holt three nights before Simon's-mass [Oct. 25], and at
once went to bed. He sung the mass on All-hallow's-day [Nov. 1], and
sung the last mass to the honour of God Almighty and all Saints for
their help and mercy to him and all Christian men quick and dead. But
before Martin's-mass he began to suffer with great pains from his
illness, and there followed both sleeplessness and loss of appetite,
and then it was thought to be a hopeless case. His sons and brethren
and many more, of his friends were already there.

2. After this he sent to fetch Thor-wald and Magnus the sons of
Gizor, and they came to Scal-holt, and to them he gave orders about
everything according to his will. And he was anointed [received the
unction] on the utas of Martin-mass. But before he was anointed with
the holy unction, he made a long discourse after the example of Saint
Thor-lac the bishop.  He confessed before all the clerks that were
there harshly [toward himself] all the things that he thought he had
done of bad ensample during his bishopric, and prayed all that they
would forgive him that in which he had trespassed against them, and he
cheerfully forgave all that in which any had trespassed against him,
and commended himself to the mercy of God.

3. And after that he was anointed, [and] there was some relief in
his sickness, until he changed his chrisom clothes, and two nights
afterwards, but then the disease of his sickness began to prevail upon
or overwhelm him anew, and he lived no longer than two nights more,
and then he received the body of the Lord at the point of death,
and then fell asleep with God.

4. But a week before the death of bishop Paul the moon shone as it
were the blood-of-sacrifice, and it gave no light at midnight in a
clear sky, and this struck many men with great awe.

5. Paul was hallowed bishop in the days of pope Celestine by archbishop
Absalom, in the days of king Swerre; he was then fifty years old. He
governed God's Christendom [here in Iceland] with great temperance
sixteen winters, and died the third day of the week one night before
Andrew's-mass [Nov. 29, 1211], and there was then passed from the
birth of God four years of the thirteenth hundred.

6. Priest Are the historian, who hath told together many memorable
things, saith how heavily our land drooped after the loss of bishop
Gizor, whom men esteemed the greatest man that had ever lived in
Iceland [see Mantissa, ch. 1]. And here it may be seen how many
fearful omens took place before the loss of this our precious chief,
bishop Paul.--The earth shook and shivered for fear, the heavens
and the clouds wept, so that great part of the growth of the earth
was destroyed, and the heavenly bodies [stars] showed upon them the
manifest tokens of death when it was well-nigh come to the last hours
of the life of bishop Paul; and the sea also burnt off the land,
to which his bishopric reached. It did show as if all the elements
showed upon themselves some mark of sorrow for his loss.

7. And the last night that bishop Paul was alive, Thor-wald Gizor's
son, the wisest of the chiefs, dreamed that John Loft's son commended
to Peter the apostle the flock which his son, bishop Paul, had charge
of; but [as] Jesus Christ commended His flock into the hands of
His Father before His Passion, so bishop Paul commended himself and
his flock to the care of Almighty God before he was called from us,
who was our father and guide.


15. 1. And now is here to be seen the whole bishopdom of the precious
or goodly bishop from stem to stern; and we believe that we may not
have spent the time thereon [unprofitably; for who of those to whom
it was granted] to see the stern, would not be longing to see also
the stem [the outset of his bishopric]?

Moreover this is a comfort for his loving friends that outlive him,
that he hath left behind him well-nigh every legacy that can be
taken after a goodly and worshipful man--to wit, worthy children,
with good substance withal to recompense them that have suffered most
by the death of bishop Paul; wealth enough and all kind of episcopal
furniture, much finished, but some launched with good substance or
material for the finishing thereof; good counsel in his teaching,
which he taught continually, both in words and by the fair example
of his life; good promise and pleasant lodging, which he perfectly
intended for the most of his nearest kinsmen. And he must have taken
counsel to this end, that God would provide for them whom he had not
made special provision for.

And this history of mine a wise man, Amund Arna's son, bishop Paul's
smith, hath confirmed, and spoken these verses--


    Sixteen years the speaker of God's law [canon law] ruled the
    bishop's see.
    Now he is called hence to God: may Paul come into full peace!
    A maker of peace and lover of justice, he ruled his see righteously
    sixteen winters.
    His work won favour both with God and man.
    Let us all intercede with God for him,
    That he may soon shine, the joyful bishop, in the choir of the
    patriarchs.


2. During the sixteen years when in God's Christendom [here in Iceland]
was adorned with the blossom of the bishopric of bishop Paul, there
were many great tidings in the world. There died pope Celestine,
archbishop Absalom, king Swerre, Hacon [and] Guth-orm, kings of Norway;
Cnut, Saurkwe, kings of the Swedes; Richard, king of the English:
bishop Nial, bishop Brand, bishop John: Harold earl in the Orkneys,
earl Philip: abbot Einar Mar's son, abbot Gud-mund Bialve's son:
abbot Haflide Thor-wald's son, abbot Thor-kell Scum's son.

Many other noble men also died while Paul was bishop, both clerks
and laymen--John Loft's son, Gizor Hall's son, Sig-mund Orm's son,
Thor-laf Thor-lac's son, Thor-wald Thor-kel's son, Calf Snorre's
son, Are Beorn's son, Aunund Thor-kel's son, Her-mund Cod-ran's son,
Thord Snorre's son, Gud-mund A-mund's son, priest Berse Hall-dor's son.

Also there were many other great tidings in his bishopric, loss of
ships and the eruption in Mount Hecla, war, rapine, and arson, and
the death of men in many dreadful ways.


[Epilogue.]

3. Now I have gone through with haste the life of bishop Paul, but
lack of skill rather than ill-will has prevented me from making this
History one of so great mark as the matter was fine which the bishop
for his part furnished.

Almighty God gladden his soul in everlasting glory for ever. Amen.










CHAPTER 4

§ 4. S.JOHN OF HOLAR'S LIFE.


The Life of bishop John of Holar (d. 1121), the gem of these Lives,
is akin in some respects to that of his brother saint, Thorlac of
Scalholt; but, though contemporary, not by the same author, as a
closer examination will convince the reader. It has a different
tone in it--more mellow, more legendary. It has passed through
the crucible of oral tradition, and comes out with a certain finer
artistic completeness and beauty than the more hard, raw, and exact
life of S. Thorlac exhibits. The seventy-seven years which separate
the biographer from the hero account for this ripeness of tone, for
this Life was certainly written after the saintship of bishop John
was declared in 1200, though not long after that event. The author
was therefore a contemporary of the Hunger-waker, and indeed may well
have drawn the chapter on Gizor from that work: hence this Life would
be the younger of the two, though, we hold, only by a few years.

The text rests upon a vellum of note, the great folio AM. 234, the
only extant compeer to the Flatey-book in point of size (but not
thickness), the biggest in margin of all Icelandic MS., two columns
standing out in every page in the midst of a huge spread of white,
clean parchment. This unwonted breadth of white margin and cleanliness
is accounted for by the fact that the MS., according to the evidence
gathered by Arne Magnusson, was preserved in the cathedral library
of Scalholt. It once contained a great collection of saints' lives,
and was written in the early part of the 14th century. 'This book,'
says Arne, 'has long belonged to the church at Scalholt, and has been
bit by bit riven asunder so. I have got many leaves of it out of many
places in Iceland in the uttermost corners of the land.' And again,
'Moreover Thormod Torfason [better known to us as Torfæus, b. 1636,
d. 1719] told me of this volume that it had formerly (I believe when
he was at school [c. 1651], rather than later when he was in Iceland)
been about a hand's breadth thick, and I remember he added that about
that time the school-boys, and may be others, had plucked leaves out
of it to put outside Latin exercise-books. When I was with Bartholin
[c. 1688], some years before his death, he had this volume on loan
from Master Thord Thorlac's [[151: 1.]] son [the bishop, editor
of Landnama-book, etc.]. I read it through then, and picked out
of all the Sagas which stand therein the vetustiores and rariores
voculas.' There are still to be seen in the volume marks of Arne's
red pencil under these 'older and rarer words.' Arne made a Latin
translation of this biography, which interested him, probably when he
was with Bartholin. The text is good, and there are no leaves lost,
luckily, in this part of the volume. It has been photographed in
reduced size by the care of Dr. Unger of Christiania, and a copy of
this facsimile is in the Bodleian by his gift.

AM. 235, a late 14th-century MS., c. 1380, is used as an additional
help. It is a great collection of saints' lives also, and Arne says
of it, 'The book is in small folio, without binding, has formerly
been the property of Scalholt church, ut puto.' It is covered with
thick grey unsized paper to protect it.

The text B (Cod. Holm. 5, fol., see pp. 422-23, and Introd. to § 6)
has rendered help in a few instances. Of S. John's Saga only the
beginning is left (see p. 548). By C, a paper copy of small value
(AM. 392) is denoted.

The editio princeps is that by the editor, Biskopa Sogor, vol. i. The
fasciculus containing it came out in 1856.

The Life of John, like that of Thorlac, is followed by a Miracle Book
of early date and various authorship and authenticity. This we have
not printed here, as it hardly enters into the plan of our work; it
is of the ordinary mediæval type, and adds neither to our knowledge of
the bishop or to the state of feeling concerning him which is already
well shown in his life. It was printed in full in the Biskopa Sogor,
vol. i. An interpolation, as we take it (between chs. 12 and 13),
of a few miracles, headed by a brief preface taken, it seems, from
Thorlac's Saga, 6. 7, we have weeded out.







1. 1. Þar hefjom ver saogo eða frá-saogn frá enom helga Ioane byscope:
at í þann tíma es réð Norege Haraldr Sigurðar son, en liðner vóro frá
falle Óláfs konungs ens Helga tveir [1707] vetr ok tottogo, þá vas enn
helge Ioan byscop foeddr á boe þeim í Fliótz-hlíð es á Breiða-bólstað
heiter. Faðer hans hét5 Ogmundr: faðer Ogmundar [1708] hét Þórkell ok
vas son Ásgeirs Cneifar. [[151: 1.]] Móðer Ioans byscops hét Þórgerðr;
hon vas Egils dótter, Hallz sonar af Síðo, þess mannz es fyrstom varð
auðet af aollom haofðingjom í Austfirðinga fiórðunge at taka skírn
ok rétta trú: móðer Þórgerðar hét Þórlaug, dótter Þórvallz or Áse.

2. Enn helge Ioan byscop óx upp heima með feðr sínom á Breiða-bólstað5
þar til es hann vas fiogorra vetra gamall; þá urðo mikel tíðende,
ok þau es aollo þesso lannz-folke vas mikell fagnaðr í: þá vas vígðr
til byscops Ísleifr, son Gizoerar ens Hvíta, ok dóttor-son Þóroddz
Goða, at boen allz landz-lýðs. Hann vas vígðr til byscops af Adalberto
erki-byscope í Brimom af Saxlande, á daogom10 Leonis ens niunda páva
með því nafne. Ísleifr vas lærðr á Saxlande í borg þeirre es Herfurða
heiter. Hann vas fyrst vígðr hingat til lannz þeirra byscopa es her
hafa at stóle seteð. Marger byscopar haofðo áðr komet til þessa lannz
þeir es ecke haofðo hegat til lannz vígðer veret, vóro sumer her miok
marga vetr en sumer skamma15 stund. Ísleifr vas í Norege enn næsta
vetr efter es hann vas vígðr til byscops, ok fór síðan til Islannz,
ok kom út á næsta sumre efter [1709] ó-aldar-vetr enn mikla, ok hafðe
stól sínn ok heimile á faoðor-leifð sínne sialfs í Scála-holte.

3. Snemmendiss var fyrer spáð af vitrom maonnom hví-líkr þesse20 maðr
moende verða, enn helge Ioan byscop; þvi at hvar sem hann kom fannzc
maonnom miket um hann, þeim es hugleiddo hví-líkt bragð yfer hónom vas.

[[152: 2.]]

4. Goðine hét maðr, ok vas kallaðr Goðine enn Góðe; ok þat hyggja menn,
at hann hafe svá veret: hann sá enn helga Ioan, þá es hann vas barn at
aldre, ok roedde um hann þessom orðom: 'Siá maðr es fríðr, ok hefer
yfer ser miket heilagleiks bragð.' Nú kom þar at því sem mælt es, at
'Spá es þat es spaker mæla [1710].'5



2. 1. Þá es Ioan vas barn at aldre, þá breytto þau faðer hans ok
móðer ráðe síno, ok fóro útan. Þau kómo til Danmerkr, ok fóro til
Sveins konungs, ok tók konungrenn við þeim virðolega; ok vas Þórgerðe
skipat at sitja hiá sialfre dróttningonne, Ástríðe, móðor Sveins
konungs. Þórgerðr hafðe son10 sínn, enn helga Ioan, under borðe með
ser. Ok es margs-konar kráser dýrlegar, með góðom dryck, kómo á borð
konungsens, þá varð sveinenom Ioane þat fyrer, sem iamnan es barnanna
haóttr, at hann rétte hendr til þeirra hluta es hann fýste at hafa;
en móðer hans vilde þat kviðja hónom, ok drap á hendrnar hónom. Ok es15
dróttningen Ástríðr sá þat, þá mælte hon við Þórgerðe: 'Eige svá! eige
svá! Þórgerðr mín: lióstú eige á hendr þessar, þvi at þetta ero byscops
hendr.' Nú má af slíkom at-burðom marka þat sem fyrr kómom ver orðe á,
hverso vitrom maonnom fannzc miket um; ok þeir saó ok fyrer þá hlute es
síðan kómo framm efter goðlegre20 fyrer-ætlon um enn helga Ioan byscop.

2. Þat es ok skylt at tiá, es enn helge Óláfr konungr mælte við
Þórgerðe, móðor ens helga Ioans byscops--hon vas þá átta [1711]
vetra [[153 : 2.]] gaomol, es hon fór til Noregs með feðr sínom
ok moeðr. Egill fór til hirðar ens helga Óláfs konungs, ok vas þar
vel virðr sem aller aðrer Íslenzker [1712] menn þeir sem héðan kómo
at. En es at Iólom dró, þá ú-gladdesc Egill. Konungrenn fann þat,
ok spurðe hvat til hélde. Egill kvað þat ecke vesa. En es konungr
leitaðe efter,5 þá seger Egill hónom--ef hann skylde noeckot til
finna--at hónom þótte þat hellzt at, ef Þórlaug kona hans skylde
eige vesa sett iam-virðolega sem hann at þeirra hótíð enne dýrlego,
es þá fór í haond. Konungrenn kvezc mundo ráða boetr á því, ok bauð
henne til sín at Iólonom, ok baóðom þeim moeðgom. Ok Ióla-kveldet,
es þær10 vóro í gaongo með Ástríðe dróttningo efter konungs haoll,
ok vas þeim ok í sæte skipat hiá dróttningonne, þá þecker konungrenn
meyna, ok mæler síðan við Egil faoðor hennar: 'Þesse dótter þín lízc
mer væn mær, ok með góðo yfer-bragðe, ok þat kann-ek at segja þer, at
hon verðr gæfo-maðr mikell, ok sá mon gaofgaztr15 ætt-boge á Íslande
es frá henne man koma.' Nú hefer þat fagrlega efter genget, sem vaón
vas at, es þesse enn helge maðr mælte, ok birtezc yfer þessom helga
manne Ioane byscope, syne hennar: þvi at sá es sannlega gaofogr, es
hann vas prýddr með maorgom mann-kostom, ok veg-samaðr með byscoplegre
tign meðan hann lifðe20 þessa heims; en nú skínn hann faogrom iartegnom
ok verðr at mikelle hiaolp aollom þeim es hann soekja at árnaðar-orðe
við Al­máttkan Goð.



[[153: 3.]]

3. 1. Þá es faðer Ioans ok móðer haofðo útan veret slíka stund sem þeim
þótte at ráðe, þá fóro þau út aftr til Íslannz ok settozc í bú sítt á
Breiða-bólstað. En es enn helge Ioan vas af liðenn enne mesto bernsko,
þá feck faðer hans hann til læringar Ísleife byscope; óx hann upp hónom
under haondom,5 ok þroskaðezc brátt í helgo náme ok góðom siðom; þvi
at hann vas vel til náms komenn um hvárt-tveggja með Ísleife byscope.


2. Marger hofðingjar ok virðoleger menn aðrer seldo sono sínar til
fóstrs ok til læringar Ísleife byscope, ok léto vígja til presta:
þeir urðo síðan marger hofuð-kennimenn; en tveir vóro byscopar af
þeim: enn helge Ioan Norðlendinga byscop,10 es nú segjom vér í frá,
ok annar Kolr [1713] Víkverja-byscop.

3. Ísleifr byscop átte þriá sono, ok urðo aller hofðingjar mikler:
Gizoerr byscop ok Teitr, ok Þórvaldr. Gizoerr vas lærðr í Herfurðo
á Saxlande; Teit foedde Hallr í Haukadale.


Teitr son Ísleifs byscops, foedde ok lærðe marga kenne-menn;15 ok
vóro tveir byscopar af hans lære-sveinom, Þorlákr byscop enn fyrre,
ok Biaorn byscop.

4. Ísleifr byscop sá brátt, hverso vel Ioan fóstre hans foerðe ser
í nyt nám sítt, ok þá aðra góða hlute, es hann kennde hónom í sínom
faogrom doemom ok góðom siðom, þá tók hann at elska hann miok20 ok
virða mikels í maorgom hlutom; ok þar goerðo þegar aðrer efter.

5. Enn helge Ioan vas mikell maðr vexte, manna vænstr ok
lið-mannlegaztr, eygðr manna bazt; bleikr á hár [1714], ok sterkr
at afle, ok enn þeckilegste í aollo yfer-bragðe: ok svá þeckr sem
hann vas aollom25 maonnom af síno yfer-bragðe, þá vas hverge minna
um þat vert, hverso hann vas linr ok léttr við alla alþýðo í mále;
ok svá feck hann til gætt [[154: 3.]] með síno góðo um-stille, at
hann varð bæðe kærr Goðe ok góðom maonnom.

6. Nú verðr ok skyldogt at segja noeckot frá því, hverso enom helga
Ioans hafe virzc Ísleifr byscop fóstre hans: þvi at svá segja hyggner
menn ok fróðer, at þat varð Ioane byscope á munne5 iamnan, þá es hann
vas staddr hiá því es menn roeddo um sín á miðlom um þá menn es bazt
þótto at ser vesa. 'Ísleifr byscop, fóstre mínn,' kvað hann, 'allra
manna vænstr; allra manna sniallaztr; allra manna baztr.' Þá svaoroðo
þeir byscope, es áðr haofðo við talasc: 'Hverr gat nú, herra, Ísleifs
byscops?' Enn10 helge Ioan byscop svaraðe: 'Hans skal ok ofallt geta,
es ek heyre góðs mannz geteð.' Nú vas þetta fagr vitnis-burðr Ísleife
byscope, es heilagr maðr skylde svá roeða um hann; en virðing mikel
Ioane byscope, es slíkr maðr skylde hafa fóstraðan hann.

7. Sá hlutr es ok einkom sagðr, at enn Helge Ioan hafe haft15 um aðra
menn framm, at hann hafe veret raddaðr hverjom manne betr; ok þar
mano enn verða nockor merke til þess saogð síðan í frá-saognenne,
at vitrom maonnom hafe svá þótt.



4. 1. Enn helge Ioan fýstezc enn at fara útan; ok vas enn helge Ioan
þá diacn at vígslo, ok vaóno [1715] nær roskenn20 at aldre, ok girntesc
at siá góðra manna siðo, ok nám sítt at auka, siaolfom ser til nytseme
ok maorgom aoðrom, sem síðan reyndesc: þá fór hann fyrst til Noregs,
þaðan til Danmerkr; ok létter hann [[155: 4.]] eige fyrr þesse ferð
an hann geck suðr, ok soeker heim enn helga Pétr Postola; ok síðan
hverfr hann aftr þaðan, ok koemr [1716] í Danmaork in Passione Domini;
ok vas enn Sveinn konungr á lífe, ok soeker hann á hans fund.

2. Ok es hann koemr í þann stað es konungrenn vas fyrer, þá5 vas þat
þar tíðenda, at konungr vas at messo. En prestr sá es syngja skylde
messona, hóf upp at lesa passio í því es enn helge Ioan kom í kirkjona;
en hónom geck lestrenn seint ok treglega, en maonnom þótte þungt ok
haofogt at hlýða þeim es hiá stóðo. En es enn helge Ioan fann þat,
at prestrenn vas næsta goerr at10 fyrer-sión af maonnom, þá leggr
enn helge Ioan stolo yfer herðar ser, ok gengr at prestenom, ok tók
bókena or hende hónom með líti-læte, ok las passiona svá skaorolega ok
skynsamlega es aller undroðosc þeir es við vóro stadder. Ok es loket
vas tíðonom, þá sender konungr efter hónom, ok býðr hónom til sín,
ok bað hann15 lenge með ser vesa; ok lagðe á hann svá mikla virðing
at hann sette hann et næsta ser siaolfom, ok þótte miket under at
hann dvelðezc með hónom lengr an skemr; ok dvalðezc hann með hónom
um stundar saker.

3. Á þesse stundo, meðan enn helge Ioan vas með Sveine20 konunge,
þá vas hann veg-samaðr af Goðe með ágætlegom fyrer-burðom; ok um
dag es hann kom under konungs borð, þá seger hann sialfr konungenom,
hvat fyrer hann hafðe boret. 'Svá þótte mer í nótt sem ek væra staddr
í noeckorre haofot-kirkjo forkunnar [[156: 5.]] virðolegre; ok í
córenom kirkjonnar, ok svá sem í byscops rúme, sá-ek sitja Dróttenn
várn Iesum Christum; ok á fót-skemle [1717] fyrer fótom hónom sá-ek
hvar sat enn helge Dávíð konungr, ok sló haorpo sína með ágetlegre
iðrótt ok fagr-legre hlióðon; ok þat þycke mer líkara, herra, at
efter mone dvalzc hafa í minne míno5 af þeim enom fagrlegom hlióðom
es hann sló. Nú láttú, herra, foera haorpo; ok, at þer hiá vesanda,
mon-ek reyna ef ek mega muna noeckot af því es hann sló.' Þá bauð
konungr, at taka skylde haorpo ok fá Ioane; ok tók hann við haorpunne
ok stilte [1718], ok sló með svá mikelle koensko at konungrenn sialfr
ok aller þeir es við vóro10 stadder, þá haofðo á mále hverso vel sleget
vas. Ollom þótte mikels um vert þenna at-burð þeim es frá vas sagt,
ok lofoðo aller Almátkan Goð, þann es ser lætr sóma at birta dýrð
heilagra manna sínna.

4. Eige hoefer annat an geta þess við hverso miket lið Íslenzkom
maonnom varð, iam-vel útan-lendes sem her, at enom helga Ioane15
byscope. Teljom ver þann hlut fyrstan til þess, at hann spanðe út
hingat með ser Sæmund Sigfús son, þann mann es einn hverr hefer enn
veret mestr nytja-maðr Goðs Cristne á þesso lande; ok hafðe veret
lenge útan svá at ecki spurðezc til hans. En enn helge Ioan feck hann
upp spurðan ok hafðe hann sunnan með ser; ok20 fóro þeir báðer saman
sunnan út hegat til frænda sínna ok fóstr-iarðar.

5. Þá es enn helge Ioan vas útan þesso sinne, réð fyrer Norege Magnús
konungr Óláfs son, Harallz sonar, Sigurðar sonar: ok es [[156: 5.]] enn
helge Ioan kom norðr í Þróndheim, þá vas konungrenn þar. Í þenna tíma
vóro í Norege marger Íslenzker menn. Þá vas þar Teitr, son Gizoerar
byscops. Ok þá urðo þar þau tíðende, at Íslenzkr maðr, sá es Gísl hét,
vá víg; ok vas sá maðr es vegenn vas hirðmaðr Magnús konungs. En Gísl
rak þat til þessa snar-ræðes,5 at hann átte at hefna faoðor síns. En
þesse maðr hét Giaf­valldr es Gísl vá; hann hafðe veret at víge Illoga
faoðor hans. Ok bráðlega efter víget þá vas Gísl tekenn, ok fiaotraðr
af maonnom konungsens. En es þeir spurðo þat ener Íslenzko menn,
þá ganga þeir þegar þangat aller saman til stofo þeirrar es Gísl vas
inne;10 ok vas Teitr fyrer liðeno, ok hoeggr hann af hónom fiaotorenn,
ok leiðer hann á braut með ser. Ok efter þesse tíðende lætr konongr
þings kveðja, ok vas ákafa-reiðr, ok horfðe til ens mesta váða um
málet. Á þesso þinge vas aollom Íslenzkom maonnom bannat at tala sín
maól, nema enom helga Ioane, hónom vas leyft15 at tala af konungenom;
ok talaðe um málet langt oerende ok for­kunnar-sniallt; ok þat kom
til svá mikellar nytsemðar, at reiðe konungsens mýkðesc, en þeir menn
naóðo griðom ok saóttom es áðr vóro nálega til bana ráðner.



5. 1. Efter þetta fóro þeir út hingat til Íslannz, Ioan ok20 Sæmundr,
ok settozc í bú hvárr á sína faoðor-leifð, Ioan á Breiða-bólstað,
en Sæmundr í Odda, ok bioggo þar báðer miok lenge; ok vas þeirra í
miðle bróðorleg aóst ok heilakt samþycke; enda vas þeim um marga hlute
góða glíkt faret. Þeir vóro ok nær iam-gamler menn at vetra tale,
at því es ver ætlom; ok25 [[157, 158: 6.]] vas Ioan tveim vetrom
ellre. Þeir prýddo báðer miok heilagar kirkjor, þær es þeir haofðo
at varð-veita, í maorgom hlutom, ok þiónoðo þeim lítilátlega í sínom
prestzskap, ok oexto miket rétt þeirra í kennemanna vistom, þeirra
es þióna skyldo at hvárre kirkjonne fleire an áðr haofðo veret. Þeir
maótto ok kallazc at rétto5 stolpar Cristnennar, þvi at þeir studdo
hána fagrlega í sínom kenningom helgom, ok maorgom aoðrom farsælegom
hlutom, þeim es þeir miðlaðo af ser aollom þeim maonnom es þar vóro
í naónd, eða þeirra heilræðe vildo þeckjazc [1719] eða þýðazc.

2. Enn heilage Ioan byscop kvángaðezc, ok átte tvær konor;10 ok
lifðe en fyrre skamma stund, en við hváregre átte hann baorn þau es
or barnoesko hafe komesc, eða ver hafem saogor frá heyrðar.


6. 1.   Þa es Ísleifr byscop hafðe seteð at stóle í Scála-holte
fióra vetr ok tottogo, þá tók hann sótt á Alþinge, ok andaðesc heima
í Scála-holte á Dróttens15 dege, iii nonas Julii, átta tigom vetra
efter fall Óláfs Tryggva sonar. Þá vas liðet frá burð Cristz M. vetr
lxx [1720] ok þrír vetr; efter þat vas vígðr til byscops Gizoerr son
Ísleifs byscops at boen allra lannz-manna, þá es hann vas fer-toegr at
aldre. En þat vas á dogom Gregorii páva ens siaunda með því nafne,
ok á dogom Óláfs konungs Harallz sonar, ij vetrom efter andlát
Ísleifs byscops. Gizoerr fór suðr til Róms,20 ok beidde þar vígslo,
fyrer þvi at Lemmarus erki-byscop vas mis-sáttr við páva, ok mátte
hann fyrer því eige vígslo gefa. Þá sende Gregorius páve Gizoer
til erki-byscops þess, es vas á Saxlande í Magadaborg es Hardevigus
hét: hann vígðe Gizoer til byscops at boðorðe páva. Þá tvá vetr es
í miðle vóro andlátz Ísleifs byscops ok út-kvámo Gizoerar byscops,
vas hann annan her í lande; en annan, enn næsta efter25 es hann vas
vígðr, vas hann í Danmork suman, en suman á Gautlande; ok kom út um
sumaret hegat til lannz. Þá hafðe Márkus Skeggja son Logsogo. Gizoerr
byscop hefer veret mestr hofðinge ok al-gofgastr maðr á ollo Íslande,
at því es sagðe Are prestr Þórgilsson, at alðýðo virðing hafe á fallet.

2. Af ást-sælð hans ok fortolom Sæmundar prestz, ok með um-ráðom
Márkus30 Logsogo-mannz, vas þat í log teket, at aller menn á Íslande
skyldo telja fé sítt allt með svar-dogom, hvárt sem være í londom
eða lausom aurom, ok gialda tiund af, at þeim hætte sem síðan hefer
haldezc. Gizoerr byscop let log leggja á þat, at stóll byscops þess
es á Íslande være, skylde vesa í Scála-holte; en áðr vas hverge. Hann
lagðe til stólsens Scála-holtz-land, ok morg onnor auðræðe í londom
ok lausom35 aurom.


[[159: 7.]]

3. Þá es Almáttegr Goð vilde hefja upp sínn þiónosto-mann, enn
helga Ioan, á hærra pall kennemannlegrar tignar, an áðr vas hann,
þá baóðo Norðlendingar Gizoer byscop, at hann moende vilja setja
byscops-stól í Norðlendinga fiórðunge, fyrer þvi at þeir þóttosc
fiar-læger, en fiórðungrenn sá fiolmennaztr ok mestr, ok þyrfte
þar fyrer5 því mest byscoplegrar yfer-ferðar; en hennar vas þar áðr
sialdnazt kostr. Gizoerr byscop bar þetta mál fyrer ena hyggnozto
menn; ok sýndesc þeim svá aollom saman, sem þat moende ráð at láta
efter þeim þessa boen; mest fyrer þá saok, at þat sýndesc vesa miket
upp-hald Goðs Cristne, ok glíklegt at landet moende verða skemrom
byscops-laust10 ef tveir være byscoparner. Þat vas nú síðan ráðs
teket, at Gizoerr byscop gaf meirr an fiórðungenn byscopsdóms síns
til þess at byscop-stóll skylde vesa í Norðlendinga-fiórðunge, svá
sem Norðlendingar baóðo hann til. En til þess vanda ok virðingar ok
byscopsdóms yfer Norðlendinga-fiórðunge ok Norðlendingom, þá15 kaus
Gizoerr byscop Ioan prest Ogmundar son, með sam-þycke allra lærðra
manna ok ú-lærðra í Norðlendinga-fiórðunge. Ok þótt enn helge Ioan
telðesc í fyrstonne miok undan þessom vanda, fyr lítilætis saker,
þá lét hann þó at boen Gizoerar byscops, ok iáttasc under útan-ferð,
ok byscops-vígslo at taka, ef Goð vill at þess auðne.20



7. 1. Nú vóro oft síðan stefnor at áttar um þetta mál; ok rézc þat af,
at stóll Norðlendinga-byscops moende vesa settr norðr í Hialta-dale á
boe þeim es at Hólom heiter, Þar [[159: 8.]] bió virðolegr prestr sá es
[1721] Illoge hét ok var Biarnar son [1722]. Hann einn varð til þess
búenn af virðolegom maonnom í Norðlendinga-fiórðunge, at rísa upp af
sínne faoðor-leifð, fyrer Goðs sakar ok nauðsynja heilagrar kirkjo;
þvi at áðr haofðo veret langar þoefor haofðingja í miðle, hverr upp
skylde rísa af sínne faoðor-leifð ok5 staðfesto, ok varð enge til
búenn nema siá einn. Ok má þat aollom maonnom auð-sætt vesa, at þetta
goerðe hann fyr Goðs sakar; ok moende þess vænta, sem framn man hafa
komet, at Goð moende gefa hónom fagrar vister í eilífre full-sælo,
sú es at rétto má kallasc faoðor-leifð góðra manna [1723].10

2. Ok á þesso sumre þá ferr byscops-emne til skips með faoro-neyte
því, es ætlað vas hónom, ok fiár-hlutom; ok hafðe hann með ser bréf
ok innsigle Gizoerar byscops, þau es vitne baóro um hans oerende. Ok
es þeir vóro búner, léto þeir í haf; ok es ecke sagt frá ferð þeirra
fyrr an þeir kómo í Danmaork, ok urðo vel15 reið-fara. Enn helge Ioan
byscops-efne sótte þegar á fund Ozoerar erki-byscops, ok kom til þess
staðar es erki-byscop vas staddr, ok heldr síð dags.

3. Erki-byscop vas at kirkjo at aftan-soeng; ok es enn helge Ioan
byscops-efne koemr í kirkjona þá vas loket miok aftan-soeng-venom.20
Hann nemr staðar fyr útan córenn, ok hefr upp aftan-soeng sínn með
clercom sínom. Erki-byscop hafðe bannat clercom [[160: 8.]] sínom
aollom, ellrom sem yngrom, at líta útar or córnom meðan tíðer være
sungnar, ok lagt víte við ef af því være brugðet sem hann bauð. En
iam-skiótt sem erki-byscop heyrðe soengenn ens helga Ioans, þá lítr
hann útar efter kirkjonne, ok vilde vita hverr sá maðr være es líka
raodd hafðe. En es loket vas aftan-soeng-venom5 þá mælto clercar
erki-byscops við hann sialfan: 'Hvat es nú, herra byscop, hafeð-ér nú
eige sialfer gengeð á þau laog sem ér settoð!' Erki-byscop svaraðe:
'Ek iáte því, at þat es satt sem ér segeð; en þó hefer mer þetta
eige fyre oenga saok at borezc, þvi at raodd hefer boret fyre eyro
mer, þá es ek hefe eige slíka fyrr10 heyrða, ok heldr má hon þyckja
engla raoddom glík an manna.' Heðan af má þat marka, es fyrr kómom
ver orðe á í saogonne, hverso miok raodd ens helga Ioans vas frá
því sem flestra manna annarra, at vitra manna virðingo. En es Ioan
hafðe loket aftan-soeng sínom, þá geck hann á fund erki-byscops,
ok tók hann við hónom [1724]15 virðolega, ok bauð hónom til sín,
ok aollo faoro-neyte hans.

Ok es enn helge Ioan hafðe skamma stund veret með erki-byscope, þá bar
hann upp fyrer erki-byscop oerende sín, ok sýnde hónom bréf ok innsigle
Gizoerar byscops. Ok es þeir haofðo noeckora daga um þetta roett með
þeim aoðrom lærðom maonnom,20 sem erki-byscop vilde þetta mál fyrer
bera, ok es þetta vas vand­lega rann-sakat, þá mæler erki-byscop
við byscops-efne: 'Svá kannasc mer til, enn kærste bróðer, sem þú
munt flesta alla hlute til þess hafa, at þú sér til byscops fallenn;
ok því trúe-ek, at sæll [[161 : 9.]] sé sá lýðr, es slíkan byscop má
hafa yfer ser. En fyr sakar eins hlutar þess es þú hefer sagt mer,
at þú hefer tvær konor áttar, þá þore-ek eige at vígja þik án leyfe
páva ok vit-orðe hans sialfs. Nú fyrer þessa saok es þat várt ráð,
at þú farer sem skiótazt máttú á fund páfa; ok vér monom ríta með
þer með óro innsigle, ok tiá5 páfanom þítt mál. Ok ef svá verðr,
sem ver viljom vætta [1725], at hann leyfe þer vígslo at taka, en oss
at goera, þá kom aftr til mín sem skiótazt, ok mon-ek þá með fagnaðe
láta lúkasc þítt eyrende.'

5. Efter þetta ferr enn helge Ioan byscops-emne til Roma-borgar, ok
es hann koemr þar, þá vas vel teket hans mále af páfa. Þá vas10 páfe,
es enn helge Ioan kom suðr, enn helge Paschalis, sá es annarr vas með
því nafne. Enn helge Ioan berr upp [1726] fyr pávan aoll sín eyrende,
ok þar með sýner hann hónom bréf erki-byscops, ok inn-sigle þau, es
tiáðo páva mála-vaoxto alla, es á hans mále vóro. Ok es páve hafðe séð
riteð, þá veiter hann þat þeckilega es15 hann vas líti-látlega beðenn,
ok vísar enom helga (Ioane) byscops-efne á fund Ozoerar erki-byscops,
ok ritar til hans með síno innsigle, ok gefr hónom leyfe á, at vígja
enn helga Ioan til byscops.

6. Ok es Ioan hafðe teket blezan af pávanom, þá ferr hann aftr á
leið, ok koemr með síno faoro-neyte á fund Ozoerar erki-byscops.20
Ok es (hann) verðr þess varr af bréfom páva, þeim es enn helge Ioan
bar frá páfa funde, at hónom vas fullt frelse á gefet at vígja
hann, þá verðr erki-byscop forkunnlega feginn, ok þackar [[162 :
10.]] Almaótkom Goðe, es hónom skylde þess auðet verða, at láta þat
oerende ens helga Ioans verða, sem menn mundo vilja; ok beið hann
nú með siaolfom erki-byscope þeirrar stundar, es hónom sýndesc til
fellt at vígja hann. Efter þat kallar erki-byscop saman kenne-menn
þá sem við þyrfto at vesa þetta embætte; ok at aollom5 hlutom til
búnom, þá víger hann enn helga Ioan til byscops á Dróttens-dege,
tveim nóttom fyrer Tveggja-Postola-messo Philippi ok Iacobi, þat
es þriðja kalendas Maii. Efter þat es enn helge Ioan vas vígðr,
þá dvalðesc hann með erki-byscope, ok þá af hónom maorg hialpsamleg
raóð siaolfom ser til nytsemðar ok því folke10 sem hann vas yfer settr.

7. Enn helge Ioan vas vígðr til byscops, efter því sem nú vas frá sagt,
þá es hann hafðe fióra vetr ens sétta tigar at aldre. Þat vas á daogom
Paschalis páfa, ok á daogom Noregs konunga Eysteins ok Sigurðar. En
þá hafðe Gizoerr byscop stýrt Goðs Cristne iam-lenge15 sem Ísleifr
byscop faðer hans, en þat vóro fiórer vetr ok tottogo.



8. 1. Ioan byscop fór út til Íslannz á eno næsta sumre efter, es hann
hafðe vígðr veret, ok varð vel reið-fara. [1727] Ok brátt efter þat es
hann hafðe land teket þá spurðesc hans út-kváma;20 ok urðo þvi aller
fegner góðer menn, ok drifo þegar flockom at finna hann. Hann tekr
hvers mannz mále iam-léttlega; ok sýner [[162: 10.]] þat í aollo, at
eige vas hann enn af-hoga orðenn því eno helga líti­læte, es hann hafðe
áðr hann være vígðr til byscops; heldr hafðe hann þat nu því gnoegra,
með aollom aoðrom mann-kostom, sem nú vas hónom vandara um, svá miok
sem hann vas upp hafiðr af Almaótkom Goðe til mikellar virðingar.5

2. Ok þegar (es) enn helge Ioan vas búenn at fara frá skipe, þá
ferr hann heim til stólsens til Hóla, ok tók þegar at stýra vel ok
fagrlega Cristne Almáttegs Goðs þeirre sem hann vas yfer settr; ok sat
hann þá heima um vetrenn at stóle sínom. En at sumre þá reið hann til
Alþingess, ok fundosc þeir þar ok Gizoerr byscop með10 miklom fagnaðe;
ok tiáðe Gizoerr byscop maonnom, hverso miket gótt menn aótto þá Goðe
at launa, þau fagnaðar tíðende sem þá vóro orðen, es tveir byscopar
vóro á landeno; þvi at þat hafðe eige orðet áðr síðan es Cristne
kom á landet. Marga hlute roeddo þeir sín á miðle byscoparner, þá es
nytsamleger vóro, ok saomðo15 til með aoðrom lærðom maonnom hver boð
þeir skyldo bióða sínom under-maonnom.

3. Á þesso sumre hóf Ioan byscop yfer-faor sína yfer ríke sítt, ok
tók at stýra Goðs Cristne með mikelle stiórn; hirte hann vánda menn
af því velde es hónom vas gefet af Goðs haolfo, en styrkðe20 góða
mann ok siðláta í maorgom goðom hlutom.



9. 1. Enn helge Ioan byscop hafðe skamma stund at stóle seteð at Hólom,
áðr an hann lét leggja ofan kirkjo þá, es þar vas. Siá kirkja hafðe
goer vereð næst þeirre es Oxe Hialta son hafðe goera láteð. Þat hyggja
menn at sú kirkja hafe25 [[163: 11.]] mest goer veret under tré-þake
á aollo Íslande, es Oxe lét goera; ok lagðe til þeirrar kirkjo mikel
auðræðe, ok lét hána búa innan vel ok vandlega ok þekja blýe alla. En
sú kirkja brann upp aoll með aollo skrúðe síno at [1728] leyndom
dóme Goðs. Enn helge Ioan byscop lét goera kirkjo at Hólom mikla ok
virðolega, sú es stendr þar5 í dag, ok hefer hon þó veret bæðe þakið,
ok marger hluter aðrer at goerver síðan. Enn helge Ioan byscop sparðe
ecke til þessar kirkjo-goerðar, þat es þá være meire Goðs dýrð an áðr,
ok þetta hús være sem fagrlegast goert ok búet.

2. Hann valðe þann mann til kirkjo-goerðarennar, es þá þótte10
einn-hverr hagastr vesa: sá hét Þóroddr ok vas Gamla son [1729]. Ok
vas bæðe, at enn helge Ioan sparðe eige at reiða hónom kaupet miket
ok gótt, enda leyste hann ok sína sýslo vel ok góðmannlega. Þat es
sagt frá þessom manne, at hann vas svá næmr, (at) þá es hann vas í
smíðenne, þá heyrðe hann til, es prestlingom vas kend15 iðrótt sú es
grammatica heiter, en svá lodde hónom þat vel í eyrom af miklom næmleik
ok at-hoga, at hann goerðesc enn meste iðróttar-maðr í þess-konar náme.



10. 1. Þá er Ioan hafðe skamma stund byscop veret, þá lét hann setja
scóla heima þar at staðnom vestr frá20 kirkjo-durom, ok lét smíða
vel ok vandlega, [ok enn sér merke húsanna.] [1730] En til þess at
stýra scólanom, ok kenna þeim maonnom [[164: 12.]] es þar settesc í,
þá valðe hann einn enn bazta clerc ok enn sniallazta, af Gautlande;
hann hét Gísle ok vas Finna son. Hann reidde hónom miket kaup til
hvárs-tveggja, at kenna prestlingom, ok at veita slíkt upp-hald
heilagre Cristne með siaolfom byscope, sem hann mátte ser við koma,
í kenningom sínom ok for-mælom: ok5 ofallt es hann predicaðe fyrer
folkeno, þá lét hann liggja bóc fyrer ser, ok tók þar af slíkt es
hann talaðe fyrer folkeno; ok goerðe hann þetta mest af forsiaó ok
lítilæte; at þar hann vas ungr at aldre, þótte þeim meira um vert es
til hlýddo, at þeir sæe þat, at hann tók sínar kenningar af helgom
bócom, en eigi af eino saman brióst-vite.10 En svá mikel gift fylgðe
þó hans kenningom, at mennener þeir es til hlýddo, kómosc við miok ok
tóko mikla skipan ok góða um sítt ráð. En þat es hann kende í orðonom,
þá sýnde hann þat í verkonom. Kenningar hans vóro linar ok létt-bærar
aollom góðom maonnom, en vitrom maonnom þótto vesa skaplegar ok
skemtelegar;15 en vaóndom maonnom varð ótte at mikell ok saonn hirting.

2. Um allar stór-hótíðer þá vas þar fiol-menne miket, þvi at þannog vas
þá miket oerende margra manna, fyrst at hlýða tíðom, svá fagrlega sem
þær vóro framm foerðar; þar með boðorðom byscops, ok kenningom þeim
enom dýrðlegom, es þar vas þá kostr20 at heyra, hvárt sem heldr vóro
framm fluttar af siaolfom byscope, eðe þessom manne es nú vas frá sagt.



11. 1. Skamma stund hafðe enn helge Ioan byscop veret áðr hann tók
at foera siðo manna ok haótto miok í [[164: 12.]] annat efne an áðr
hafðe veret: goerðesc hirtingasamr við ó-siða-menn, en vas blíðr ok
hoegr aollom góðom maonnom; en sýnde á siaolfom ser, at allt þat
es hann kende í orðonom, þá fyllde hann þat í verkonom. Sýndesc
svá vitrom maonnom þeim es goerst visso hans ráð, at hann yrðe
sialdan af-hoga því es sialfr Dróttenn5 mælte til sínna lære-sveina:
Luceat lux vestra coram hominibus, ut videant opera vestra bona,
et glorificent patrem vestrum qui in celis est. Þesse orð mæla svá:
'Lýse liós yðart fyre maonnom, til þess at þeir sé [1731] góð-verk
yðor, ok dýrke þeir faoðor yðvarn þann es í himnom es.'10

2. Enn helge Ioan byscop lagðe ríkt við þat sem síðan hefer haldezc, at
menn skyldo soekja til tíða á helgom daogom eða á aoðrom vanda-tíðom;
en bauð prestenom at segja oftlega þá hlute es þeir þyrfto at
vita. Hann bauð maonnom, at hafa hvers-daglega haótto sem Cristnom
maonnom sómer, en þat es at soekja hvern15 dag, síð ok snemma, cross
eða kirkjo, ok flytja þar framm boener sínar með at-hoga. Hann bauð, at
menn skyldo hafa, hverr í síno herberge, mark ens helga cross til gæzlo
siaolfom ser; ok þegar es maðrenn vaknaðe, þá skylde hann signa sik,
ok syngja fyrst Credo in Deum, ok segja svá trú sína Almaótkom Goðe;
ok ganga svá20 síðan allan dagenn vápnaðr með marke heilags cross,
því es hann merkðe sik með þegar es hann vaknaðe; en taka aldregi
svá svefn eða mat eða dryck, at maðr signe sik eige áðr. Hann bauð
hverjom manne at kunna Pater Noster ok Credo in Deum [1732], ok [[165:
13.]] minnasc siau sinnom tíða sínna á hverjom dege, epter því sem
Dávíd propheta seger: Sepcies in die laudem tibi dixi, Domine Deus
meus. Þat er svá at skilja á Norroeno: 'Siau sinnom á dag sagða-ek
þer lof, Dróttenn Goð mínn [1733];' en syngja skyldolega hvert kveld,
áðr hann sofnaðe, Credo in Deum (ok) Pater Noster. Ok at ver5 lúkem
[1734] þesso male í faóm orðom, þá feck hann svá samet siðo sínna
under-manna á skaommo bragðe með Goðs fulltinge, at heilog Cristne
í Norðlendinga-fiórðunge hefer aldrege staðet með slíkom blóma,
hvártke áðr né síðan, sem þá stóð, meðan folket vas svá 10 sælt,
at þeir haofðo slíks byscops stiórn yfer ser.10

3. Hann bannaðe ok með aollo alla ú-haótto ok forneskjo, eða
blótz-skape, goerninga eðr galðra; ok reis í móte því með aollo afle;
ok hafðe því eige orðet af komet með aollo meðan Cristnen vas ung.

Hann bannaðe ok alla hindr-vitne þá es forner menn haofðo15 teket
af tungl-kvaómom eða doegrom; eða eigna daga heiðnom maonnom eða
goðom,--sem es at kalla Týrs-dag [1735], Óðens-dag eða Þórs, ok svá um
alla vico-daga; en bauð at hafa þat daga-tal, sem heilager feðr hafa
sett í ritningom, ok kalla annan dag viko, ok þriðja dag, ok svá út
[1736],--ok alla þá hlute aðra, es hónom þótto af20 íllom rótom rísa.

4. Leikr sá vas maonnom tíðr, es ú-fagrlegr es, at kveðasc skyldo at,
karl-maðr at kono, en kona at karl-manne, kloekilegar vísor [[165:
13.]] ok hæðelegar, ok ó-áheyrelegar: en þat lét hann af takazc, ok
bannaðe með aollo at goera; man-soengs-kvæðe eða vísor vilde hann
eige heyra kveðen, ok eige láta kveða; þó feck hann því eige með
aollo af komet.

[Double text, B.] Leikr sá var kærr maonnom áðr en enn heilagr5 Ioan
varð byscop, at kveða skylde karlmaðr til kono í danz blautleg kvæðe
ok regeleg, ok kona til karlmannz man-soengs vísor. Þenna leik lét
hann af taka, ok bannaðe styrklega.

5. Þat es sagt í frá, at hann kom á hlióð, at Kloengr Þórsteins son,
sá es síðan varð byscop í Scála-holte, en vas þá prestlingr ok10 ungr
at aldre, las bóc þá es kaolloð es Ovidius, De Arte [1737]. Í þeirre
bóc býr man-soengr mikell; en hann bannaðe hónom at lesa þess-konar
boecr; ok kallaðe þó hverjom manne mundo oeret haofogt at gæta sín
við líkamlegre munoð ok rangre aóst, þó at hann kveykðe eige upp hog
sínn með ne einom dictom [1738] eða þess-konar kvæðom.15

6. Hann vas ok iðenn at því, at sníða af maonnom lióta (laosto); ok svá
fór hann koenlega með því, at sá kom nálega einge á hans fund, at eige
fenge hann á noeckora lund leið-réttan fyrer sakar goðlegrar ástar,
ok kost-gæfe þeirrar es hann lagðe á hverjom [[166: 13.]] manne at
hialpa. Ok ef hann lagðe maonnom harðar skrifter á hendr fyrer sakar
mikella gloepa, en þeir genge under vel ok líti­látlega, þá vas skamt
at bíða, áðr (et) helgasta hans brióst, þat es Heilagr Ande hafðe
valeð ser til bygðar: þá sam-harmaðe hann þeirra meinlætom, ok létte
þá noeckot skriftonom; ok þá saomo5 menn es hann hafðe fyrr barða fyr
sakar goðlegrar ástar ok um-vandanar, þeim enom saomom líknaðe hann
þá miskunnsamlega, es þeir vóro við skilðer sína annmarka. Ok sá es
alla sína under-menn elskaðe sem broeðr eða [1739] sono, þá foeddesc
hann af engra þeirra ann-maorkom eða van-haogom, en sam-fagnaðe því
es aoðrom10 geck vel; en harmaðe þat allt es annan veg varð. Hann
vas svá hog-góðr, at varla mátte hann siá eða vita þat es maonnom vas
til meins, en svá oerr ok mildr við fátoeka menn, at varla hafðe hans
make fengezc.  Hann vas sannr faðer allra fátoekra manna; huggaðe hann
eckjor ok faoðor-lausa; ok enge kom svá harm-þrungenn15 á hans fund,
at eige fenge á nockorn veg huggan af hans til-stille. Svá vas hann
ást-sæll við allt folk, at enge vilde nálega hónom í móte goera; ok
vas þat meirr saker goðlegrar ástar, þeirrar es aller menn unno hónom,
an líkamlegrar hræzlo; ok þar es hann braut sína fýse í marga staðe, en
goerðe Goðs vilja, ef20 hann fann þat, at þat vas eige allt eitt fyrer
saker líkamlegs eðless, þá launaðe Goð hónom þat svá í haond þegar,
at hann okaðe under hann alla under-menn í heilagre hlýðne. Enn heilagr
Johannes lifðe líf sítt efter goðlegre setningo ok góðra manna doemom;
vas [[167: 14.]] á boenom nætr ok daga, ok fastaðe laongom; ok deydde
sik í maorgom hlutom til þess, at þá mætte hann meira á-vaoxt gialda
Goðe an áðr, af þeim hlutom aollom es hónom vóro á hende folgner.



12. 1. Ok til þess at hann mætte þá vesa friálsare an áðr5 tíðer
at veita, eða for-mæle, eða aðra hlute þá framm at foera, es Goðs
Cristne være mest upp-hald at, þá valðe hann menn til forráða fyrer
staðenn með ser, þá es fyrer skyldo siá staðarens eign með huspreyjo
þeirre gaofogre es hann hafðe áðr átta es Valdís hét [1740].10

2. Einn af þeim maonnom vas prestr virðolegr, sá es Hámundr hét,
Biarnar son; hann vas afi [1741] Hildar nunno, ok einseto-kono [sem
enn man geteð verða síðarr í þesso mále] [1742]. Næst Hámunde vas at
raóðom prestr sá es Hialte hét, ok vas frænde byscops. Af leik­maonnom
vas sá maðr með í raóðom, es vas gaofogr at ætt; hann15 hét Orn, ok
vas son Þórkels af Víðe-mýre. Þesser menn aonnoðosc mest þat es til
staðarens kom, ok skipoðo maonnom til sýslo, sumom til at-flutningar
við staðenn um þá hlute es þurfa (þótte). Sumer vóro setter til
verknaðar; sumer at þióna fátoekom maonnom; ok vas byscop vandr at
því, at þat være miskunnsamlega goert: sumer20 at taka við gestom;
þvi at á hverre hótíð sótto menn á fund byscops, hundrað manna eðr
stundom tvau hundroð eða noeckoro fleire; þvi at enn heilage Ioan
hafðe þat í formælom sínom, at [[168: 14.]] hónom þótte þvi at eino
til fullz, ef hverr maðr í héraðeno, sá es fóta sínna hefðe for-ráð
[1743], koeme um sinn et siallnasta at vitja staðarens at Hólom á tolf
maónoðom. Ok fyrer þá saok varð þar svá fiol-mennt at Skír-dege eða
Pascom, at þar skorte eige fiogor hundroð manna, allt saman, karlar
ok konor. Ok þó at marger5 af þessom maonnom hefðe vister með ser,
þá vóro hiner fleire es á byscops koste vóro, ok af hónom vóro sadder
bæðe andlegre foezlo ok líkamlegre, ok styrkðer með byscoplegre blezan
fóro með fagnaðe til sínna heim-kynna.

3. Marger siðláter menn réðosc þangat heim til staðarens, ok10 gaófo
fé með ser--en sumer foeddo sik sialfer--til þess at hlýða kenningom
byscops ok tíða-goerð; ok goerðo ser hús umb-hverfis kirkjo-garðenn.

4. Heilagr Ioan byscop tók marga menn til læringar, ok feck til góða
meistara at kenna þeim: Gísla Finna-son, es fyrr gaótom ver,15 at
kenna grammaticam; en Ríkinna prest, einn franzeis [1744], capalín
sínn ok ást-vin, at kenna soeng eða versa-goerð; þvi at hann vas
ok enn meste lærdóms-maðr. Þá vas þat ecke hús nálega, at eige
være noeckot iðnat í, þat es til nytsemðar vas. Þat vas enna ellre
manna haóttr, at kenna enom yngrom; enn ener yngre ritoðo þá20 es
náms varð í miðle. Þeir vóro aller sam-þycker, ok eige deildo þeir;
ok einge aofundaðe annan. Ok þegar es til vas hringt tíða, [[168,
171:  14, 17.]] þá kómo þeir þar aller, ok flutto framm tíðer sínar
með miklom at-hoga; vas ecke at heyra í córenn nema fagr soengr, ok
heilakt boena-hald. Ener ellre menn kunno ser at vesa vel siðaðer;
en smá-sveinar vóro svá hirter af meistorom sínom, at þeir skylde
eige treystasc með gá-leyse at fara.5

5. Þesser kenne-menn foeddosc upp under hende Ioane byscope: Kloengr
es fyrr vas nefndr, es síðan varð byscop í Scála-holte, ok prýdde
þann stað í sínne bóca-goerð; ok þar vas hann um daga Ketils byscops,
ok svá Biarnar byscops, vin-sæll við alla góða menn. Þar vas ok lærðr
Vilmundr, enn fyrste ábóte at Þingeyrom;10 ok Hreinn ábóte; þar vas
ok lærðr Biaorn byscop, sá es enn þriðe vas byscop at Hólom. Marger
vóro þar virðoleger kenne-menn aðrer upp foedder ok lærðer, þó at
ver nefnem þá eige [1745].



13. 1. Þá es enn helge Ioan hafðe skamma stund at stóle seteð,
þá goerðe maonnom ráð sítt ó-hoegt; gnúðe á hallære15 miket, ísar
mikler ok [1746] veðrátta kaold, svá at iaorð vas ecki í-gróðra at
vár-ðinge. Enn helge Ioan byscop fór til vár-þings þess es vas at
Þing-eyrom; ok es hann kom þar, þá heitr hann til árs, við sam-þycke
allra manna, at þar skylde reisa kirkjo ok boe, ok skyldo aller þar
til leggja, þar til es sá staðr yrðe efldr. Efter heit þetta lagðe
enn20 helge Ioan af ser skickjo sina, ok markaðe sialfr grund-vaoll
under kirkjona. En svá snoeresc skiótt ráð manna á-leiðess, at á þeirre
[[172: 17.]] saomo vico vóro á brauto ísar [1747] þeir aller es þetta
hallære hafðe af staðet at miklom hluta, svá at hverge varð vart við;
en iaorðen skipaðesc svá skiótt við til gróðrar, at á þeirre saomo
vico vóro sauð-graos nær oeren.

2. Sá hlutr lá á staðnum á Hólom, at þar vas báss einn sá í5 fióse
es eige hlýdde naut á at binda, þvi at hvert lá dautt um morgonenn es
um aftanenn vas á bundet. Þat vas eitt-hvert haust, at enn helge Ioan
geck til meðr ráðs-manne at ætla naut til lífs, þau es heima þar skyldo
vesa at staðnom. Ok es þeir haofðo til ætlað, þá seger nauta-maðr hónom
[1748] deile á, at eige mundo nauten svá10 maorg rúm hafa með þvi at
bássenn einn vas ó-tyttr [1749]. Byscop kvað svá vesa skyldo, sem hann
kvað á ok ætlaðe til, ok kvað svá skyldo binda á þann bás sem á aðra:
ok svá vas goert. En um morgonenn efter es til fióss vas komet, þá
lá kýr á báse þeim (enom) sama, ok vas dauð. Þat vas sagt byscope,
ok bað hann binda15 þangat naut annat, ok et þriðja, ok dó þau. Þá
mælte nauta-maðr við byscop: 'Hverso lenge skal svá framm fara sem nú
es?' Byscop svarar: 'Svá skal á meðan nauten nockor ero til, ef Goð
vill at staðr siá eyðesc fyrer þessar saker.' Efter þetta lét af, ok
sigraðe Ioan byscop svá þetta ó-frelse með trú sínne ok stað-feste.20

3. Þat vas enn eitt hvert vár, at váraðe svá seint, at iaorð vas lítt
í-gróðra at Far-daogom. Þá reið enn helge Ioan byscop til Alþingess,
ok hét þar til ár-bótar maonnom Ioans-messo Baptiste; ok es hann [[172:
18.]] hafðe fyrer skilt heiteno, ok þat vas fest, þá mælte hann þessom
orðom á efter: 'Þat vilda-ek, at Goð gæfe oss nú þegar doeggena:'
ok lýstesc þat í því, at hann vas miok bráð-látr maðr. Sumaret hafðe
veret þurko-samt áðr, svá at eige hafðe geteð doeggvar, ok vóro fyrer
því graosen nær einge. Ok þá es enn helge Ioan byscop5 hét, þá vas svá
þunnt veðr ok hreint, at hverge sá ský á himne. En þá es hann hóf upp
Gloria in excelis þann dag í messo, þá kom regn svá miket af himne,
at maonnom þótte íll-vært úte fyrer vát-viðris saokom. Þaðan í frá
um sumaret vóro doeggvar um nætr, en sól-skin um daga; ok geck því
noeckora stund: gras-vaoxtr10 varð þat sumar til meðal-lags.

4. Þesse enn helge Ioan byscop vas prýddr af Goðe í maorgom merkilegom
firir-burðom ok faogrom vitronom; ok vas þat eige all-kynlegt, at
hónom være marger merkeleger hluter í svefnenom sýnder; þvi at hann
hafðe eige meira svefnenn an hann mátte15 minztan nýta; en hugrenn
vas iafnan, áðr hann sofnaðe ok þegar hann vaknaðe, á Goðs þiónosto
ok heilogo boena-halde.

5. Þat bar fyrer hann á þeirre saomo nótt sem andaðesc suðr í
Scála-holte Þórkell prestr fóst-bróðer hans [1750], ok Trandill
hét aoðro nafne: hann vas enn virðolegste kenne-maðr. Þat vas efter
nátt-soeng20 þá [1751] es enn helge Ioan byscop vas komenn í hvílo; ok
iam-skiótt sem hann hneigðe sik at hoegende, rann þegar haofge á hann,
ok þótte hónom sem maðr genge inn, sá es hann kende eige, ok [[173:
19.]] næme stað í miðjo herbergeno. Hónom þótte sem sá maðr være spurðr
af þeim maonnom sem við vóro ef hann segðe noeckot nýrra tíðenda. En
hann sagðe: 'Þórkel helgan.' Eige mælte hann fleira. Byscop vaknaðe,
ok spratt upp þegar, ok kallaðe á Rikinna erki-prest sínn, ok mælte
við hann: 'Rís upp þú bróðer, ok faorom5 til kirkjo, ok lofom Almátkan
Goð, þvi at Þórkell prestr, bróðer ockarr, es nú liðenn af þesso lífe;
ok skolom vit nú fela aond hans Almaótkom Goðe á hende.' Spurt haofðo
þeir at hann vas siúkr. Þeir fóro þá til kirkjo, ok héldo saólo-tíðom;
ok þá seger hann prestenom Rikinna hvat fyrer hann hafðe boret.10


[Á eno tolfta áre byscopsdóms ens heilaga Ioans byscops urðo morg
stór-tíðende. Þá andaðesc Gizorr byscop í Scála-holte, þrim togom
nóttom síðarr an Þorlákr Rúnolfsson toeke byscops vígslo: þat vas
á þriðia dag viko v kal. Junii. Þorlákr vas koerenn [1752] til
byscops at boen Gizorar byscops, eino sumre fyrr æn Gizorr byscop
andaðesc. Gizorr vas byscop xxx ok vj vetr. Þá vas liðet frá Burð
Cristz m.c.xviii [1753]15 ár. Á því áre eno sama andaðesc Pascalis
papa; Baldvine Iorsala konungr; Arnaldus patriarcha í Hierusalem;
Cirialax Girkja (konungr); Philippus Svia konungr. Þá vas liðet frá
falle Óláfs konungs Tryggva-sonar c ok xviij vetr.]


6. Eitt-hvert sinn, þá es heilagr Ioan hafðe til svefns lagzt einhverja
nótt, þá bar fyrer hann sýn. Hann þóttesc staddr vesa á20 boen sínne
fyrer einom miklom róðo-crosse; ok því næst þótte hónom lícnesket á
crossenom hneigjasc at ser ok mæla noeckor orð í eyra ser, ok vito
ver eige hver þau vóro; þessa sýn sagðe hann Rikinna preste, ok vas
einge sá es ráða kynne. En enn næsta dag efter, þá kómo á fund heilags
Ioans byscops þeir menn25 es þá vóro ný-komner af hafe, ok foerðo hónom
bóc eina. Á þeirre bóc vas sá at-burðr ritaðr es á þesso lande vas þá
miok ó-kunnr, [[174: 21.]] sagt frá því, es Gyðingar píndo lícneskjo
várs herra Jesu Christi á crosse í borg þeirre es Berytho heiter
[1754], efter þeim hætte sem þeir haofðo fyrr píndan Dróttenn várn
Iesum Christum; þeir baordo lícnesket með svipom, ok spýtto á þat,
ok gaófo því hals-hoegg: efter þat cross-festo þeir þat, ok gengo
síðan fyrer crossenn ok skelkto [1755]5 at lícneskeno efter doemom
enna fyrre Gyðinga. Efter þat tóko þeir spiót, ok laogðo grimmlega
í síðo lícneskeno. Þá varð dá­samlegr at-burðr ok fá-heyrðr: vatn
með blóðe hlióp or síðo lícneskeno, ok af því blóðe ok vatne fengo
marger siúker menn heilso. Ok es Gyðingar saó þenna at-burð allan
iam-saman, þá goerðo þeir10 iðran af aollo hiarta, ok snoerosc til
Goðs. Ok es heilagr Ioan byscop ok Rikíne prestr haofðo leset þenna
at-burð, þá mælte prestrenn við byscop brosande: 'Sé her nú, faðer,
draum þann es Dróttenn sýnde þer í nótt.' Síðan lofoðo þeir báðer
Dróttenn Jesum Christum.15

*    *    *    *    *    * [1756]



14. 1. En es sú tíð vas komenn es Almáttegr Goð vilde eilíf­lega
aombona enom helga Ioane byscope þat starf ok erviðe með miklom
meinlætom, es hann hafðe fyrer Goðs saker boret, þá tók enn helge Ioan
byscop sótt; ok með þeirre saomo sótt leið hann af þesso lífe. Sótten
vas ecke á-kaof, ok mátte hann efter20 því aollom hlutom skipa ok
hugsa, sem hann vilde. Ok es hann lá í þesse sótt, ok vas enn eige
oliaðr, þá kom til hans einn af lære-sveinom [[175: 22.]] (hans)
rítare góðr ok vin-sæll maðr, prestr at vígslo; hann hét Þórvarðr,
ok vas kallaðr Knappe or Knappa-dal: hann hafðe með ser bóc es hann
hafðe ritat ok goerva preste einom, þeim es þaðan vas langt í braut,
ok hafðe sá beðet hann miok til at goera bócena; ok haofðo þeir á þat
sæzc sín á miðlom, at byscop skylde5 virða bócena, ok skylde prestrenn
efter því kaupa. Byscop varð fegenn prestenom, ok mælte við hann
blíðlega: 'Gack at mer, son mínn, ok kyss faoðor þínn friðar-koss,
áðr an ek aondomc, sem aðrer broeðr þíner.' Síðan geck prestrenn at
hónom, ok kyste hann. Efter þat sýner hann hónom bócena, ok seger,
á hvat þeir10 haofðo sæzt um verðet sín í miðlom; ok bað hann virða
bócena. En byscop hyggr at bócenne, ok lofaðe miok ok mælte síðan: 'Góð
es þesse bóc, ok vel ritoð; en eige mon hónom verða auðet bócarennar;
annarr nockorr man hennar nióta skolo.' Prestrenn svarar: 'Fyrer hví,
faðer? legg þú á verðet, en hann mun giarna15 kaupa efter því; þvi at
hann bað mik miok, at ek skylda hónom slíka bóc goera.' Byscop svarar:
'Þat má ek goera,' seger hann, 'ef þú vill, at virða bócena: an eige
þarf þess, fyrer því, at sá enn same prestr, es þú hefer bócena ætlað,
es nú andaðr.' Þess vas í miðlom noeckor hríð, ok þess es spurðesc
and-lát þess20 ens sama prestz, ok hafðe hann þá andaðr veret,
es byscop sagðe and-lát hans. Ollom maonnom þótte mikels um vert,
es enn heilage Ioan byscop mátte slíka hlute vita, þar es hann vas
þesso hverge í naónd.

2. Nú tók þó miok at líða at enom helga Ioane byscope; en þó25 [[176:
22.]] at maóttrenn þyrre miok, þá helt hann þó iamnan síno boena-halde
meðan hann mátte mæle [1757]. Efter þat let hann olea sik, ok vóro
þar við stadder aller þeir lærðer menn sem á staðnom vóro, ok aðrer
hans hugðo-menn. Hann hafðe þá áðr þannog til skipat, sem hónom þótte
vænlegazt. Efter þat lét hann gefa ser corpus Domini;5 ok es hann
hafðe því bergt, þá soeng hann fyrst communio þessa; Refecti, domine,
pane celesti ad vitam quesumus nutriamur eternam. Efter þat hóf hann
upp psalm þenna: Benedicam dominum in omni tempore; semper laus ejus
in ore meo. Þesse orð þýðasc svá: 'Lofa man-ek Dróttenn á hverre tíð,
ok iafnan sé lof hans í munne mínom.'10 Ok þá es hann hafðe þenna
psalm í munne, ok enn hroerðesc tungan til þessa enna heilogo orða,
þá skilðesc hans en heilaga aond við sínn líkama, ok vas þá boren af
Goðs englom til þeirra fagnaða, es henne vóro fyrer-búner af Almaótkom
Goðe; ok man hann þar lofa Almátkan Goð at eilífo með aoðrom helgom
maonnom, svá sem hann15 hafðe fyrer heiteð í psalmenom, þeim es hann
soeng síðast.

3. En enn heilage Ioan byscop leið af heime þessom til eilífra fagnaða
á Laugar-dege, ix kal. Maii. Þá vas liðet frá Burð Christi MC ok
xiiij [1758] vetr. Hann vas vígðr til byscop þá es hann hafðe fióra
vetr ens sétta tegar; en hann sat í byscopsdóme sínom xv20 vetr. Ok
þá es hann hafðe allz lifat í þessom heime lx vetra ok ix vetr,
þá andaðesc hann í góðre elle--þat vas ok á daogom Calixti papa es
annarr vas með því nafne, á daogom Noregs konunga, Ey­steins [[176:
22.]] ok Sigurðar; en þá vas andaðr Óláfr konungr, bróðer þeirra. Þá
vas byscop í Scála-holte Þorlákr byscop Rúnolfs son.

4. Lærðer menn þeir sem við vóro stadder, bioggo um lík ens heilaga
Ioans byscops vel ok roekilega [1759]. Ok es þar vas komet es líket
vas prýtt ok búet til graftar, ok sungenn lík-soengr framan til5 þess
es út skylde bera, þá gengo til af lærðom maonnom þeir es bera skyldo,
ok tóko under barnarnar, ok vildo upp hefja. Þá brá því við, es aollom
maonnom þótte mikels um vert, þeir es við vóro: líket varð svá þungt,
at þeir maótto oengan veg hroera es til vóro setter út at bera. Þetta
feck aollom mikellar á-hyggjo, ok roeddo10 sín á miðlom hverjo gegna
moende. Þá tekr til orða vel ok hygge­lega einn af clerkom ok seger
svá: 'Várrar van-hyggjo mon at gialda um þenna at-burð, ok mono vér
hafa goert nockorn hlut ó-virðolega í várre þionosto við byscop várn:
leiteð nú efter vand­lega, hvárt hann hafe þá hlute alla í skrúðeno sem
hoefa ok til15 heyra hans vígslo.' Þá vas um leitað, ok rannsakaðesc
svá til, at þeir haofðo eige dreget á haond enom heilaga Ioane byscope
fingr-goll hans, ok lá þat þar á pallenom [1760]. Þeir tóko þá gollet
ok drógo [[177: 22.]] á haond hónom; ok efter þat gengo til ener saomo
menn sem fyrr, ok tóko þá upp líket léttlega ok baóro til graftar.

5. Líkame ens heilaga Ioans byscops var iarðaðr útan kirkjo fyrer
sunnan soeng-húset [fyrer útan kirkjo til austrs nær saonghús-veggenom
syðra] [1761], ok goert yfer hválf. Þar laógo bein hans lxxx vetr5 ok
nockoro minnr, þar til es Goð birte hans dýrð með faogrom iartegnom,
ok heilagr dómr hans vas or iaorðo tekenn. Þá lét virðolegr herra
Brandr byscop taka upp helgan dómenn ok foera í kirkjo inn, ok búa
um virðolega með mikelle dýrð til lofs órom Dróttne Jesu Christo.10

Sá láte ser sóma, fyr verðleika þessa síns heilaga ást-vinar ok
boener, at firra oss vandræðom ok háskasamlegom hlutom: en þá es
ver líðom af þessom heime, sam-tenge hann órar sálor sínom vaolðom
maonnom. Þetta veite oss Almáttegr Goð [1762], sá es lifer ok ríker
einn Goð í Þrenningo, per omnia secula seculorum. Amen.15







The Life of S. John the Bishop.


1. 1. We begin the story or record of the holy bishop John in the days
when Harold Sigurd's son was ruling Norway, and there were passed from
the fall of king Olaf the Saint two-and-twenty winters. In that time
was the holy bishop John born in a homestead in Fleet's-lithe that
is called Broad-bowster. His father was named Og-mund. The father of
Og-mund was named Thor-kel, and was the son of As-gar Cneif. The mother
of bishop John was named Thor-gerd. She was the daughter of Egil the
son of Hall o' Side, who was the man who had the fortune to be the
first of the chiefs of the East-frith-men's Quarter to take baptism
and the true faith. Thor-gerd's mother was named Thor-laug. [She was]
the daughter of Thor-wald o' Ridge.

2. The holy bishop John grew up at home with his father and mother
at Broad-bowster until he was five winters old, and then there came
about great tidings and ones which all the people of this land were
greatly rejoiced at--to wit, the consecration as bishop of Is-laf,
the son of Gizor the White, and daughter's son of Thor-odd gode,
according to the prayer of the whole people of this country. He was
hallowed bishop by Adalbert, archbishop of Bremen in Saxland [Saxony],
in the days of Leo, the ninth pope of that name. Is-laf was taught
in Saxland in the town that is called Herfurd [Herford]. He was the
first consecrated to be bishop of this country that has had his see
here. Many bishops had come into this country aforetime which had not
been consecrated to be bishops of this country; some were here very
many winters, and some a short while. Is-laf was in Norway the next
winter after he was consecrated bishop, and afterwards he went to
Iceland, and came out hither the next summer after the great famine
[1057], and set up his see and his home in his own paternal heritage
at Scal-holt. [Cp. Hungrv. ch. 1. 3, 4.]

3. It was early the prediction of wise folk what a man he would come
to be, this holy bishop John, for wherever he went men were impressed
when they looked in his countenance.

4. There was a man named Godwine, and he was called Godwine the Good,
and men believe that he was so indeed. He saw the holy bishop John
when he was yet a child, and spake of him in these words, 'That is a
fair child, and he hath in him a great appearance of holiness.' And
now it hath come to pass according to the saw, 'What wise men say
will come to pass.'


2. 1. When John was yet a child his father and mother broke up
housekeeping and went abroad together. They came to Denmark and
went to king Swein, and the king received them worshipfully, and
Thor-gerd was made to sit by the queen herself, Est-rith, the mother
of king Swein. Thor-gerd had her son the holy [bishop] John at the
table with her, and when many kinds of precious dainties with good
drink came to the king's table, then it happened with the boy John,
as is ever the way with children, that he stretched out his hands to
the things he wished to have. But his mother would have chidden him,
and smote his hands. But when queen Est-rith saw this, she spake
to Thor-gerd, 'Not so, not so, Thor-gerd mine; do not strike those
hands, for they are bishop's hands.' Now from such an occurrence it
may be seen, as we have said before, what wise folk thought of him,
and they foresaw what afterwards came to pass, by God's providence,
with respect to the holy bishop John.

2. It is also needful to put down what the holy king Olaf said to
Thor-gerd, mother of the holy bishop John. She was then eight winters
old when she went to Norway with her father and mother. Egil went
into the service of the holy king Olaf, and was well treated there,
as were all other worshipful men of Iceland that came thither. But
when it drew on to Yule, Egil began to be sad. The king espied it, and
asked him what was the matter. Egil said it was naught; but when the
king enquired into it, then Egil told him that if there were anything
amiss it was rather this, that Thor-laug his wife would not be treated
as honourably as himself when they held the glorious feast that was
then close at hand. The king said that he would put this to rights,
and asked her to spend Yule with him, and her daughter also. And on
Yule evening, when they were walking up the hall with queen Est-rith,
and they were given seats for them close to the queen, the king espied
the maid, and afterwards said to Egil her father, 'This daughter of
thine seems to me a fair maid and of goodly bearing, and I can tell
thee that she will be a lucky lady, and it shall be the noblest family
in Iceland that shall spring from her.' And now that hath fairly come
to pass as was to be looked for indeed, which the holy man spake,
and hath been shown forth in this holy man bishop John her son, for
he indeed is truly noble, that was honoured by the choice of many men
and glorified with the office of bishop while he lived in this world,
and now he shineth by fair miracles, and hath become of great help
to all them that seek his intercession with Almighty God.


3. 1. When the father and mother of John had been abroad such while
as they thought good, they went back to Iceland again, and settled
down in their homestead at Broad-bowster. And when the holy [bishop]
John was grown to be a big boy, his father put him to school to
bishop Is-laf. And he grew up in his charge, and soon grew ripe in
holy learning and good manners, for in bishop Is-laf he had the best
means of getting both.

2-3. [See Hungrv. 1. 7 b, and 2.] Hall of Hawk-dale fostered
Tait. Tait, bishop Is-laf's son, fostered and taught many clerks. Two
of his disciples afterwards became bishops, viz. bishop Thor-lac the
first, and bishop Beorn of Holar.

4. Bishop Is-laf soon saw how well his fosterling John was getting on
with his learning and the other good things which he taught him with
fair ensamples and goodly conversation. Then he began to cherish him
greatly, and hold him of much account in many ways, and others soon
did the same after his example.

5. The holy [bishop] John was a big man of growth, the most goodly
and handsome of men, the best-eyed of any man, light of hair, and
strong of body, and the best-favoured in his whole carriage; but no
matter how well-favoured he was in all men's sight in his bearing,
yet he was not a whit less remarked for the gentleness and lowliness
of his speech to all people. And so by God's help he brought it about
that he became dear both to God and to good men.

6. Now it hath become needful to say somewhat of this also, in what
account the holy bishop John held his foster-father bishop Is-laf,
for as men of wisdom and knowledge say, it was ever in bishop John's
mouth when he happened to be by when men were talking among themselves
of the man whom they held the best. 'Bishop Is-laf, my foster-father,'
he would say, 'was the handsomest of all men, the cleverest of all men,
the best of all men.' Then they that had been talking before would
answer the bishop, 'Who was speaking, my lord, of bishop Is-laf?' And
the holy bishop John would answer, 'I must needs speak of him whenever
I hear a good man spoken of.' Now this was a fair testimony to bishop
Is-laf that a holy man should speak so of him, and a great honour to
bishop John that such a man should have fostered him.

7. This thing is also specially spoken of which the holy bishop John
had had above all other men--to wit, that he was better voiced than any
man, and hereof shall be some token spoken of later in this history,
that wise men have held that it was so.


4. 1. The holy bishop John was minded to go abroad, and he was then a
deacon in orders, and well-nigh a full-grown man, and he yearned to
see the ways of good men, and to increase his learning both for his
own profit and for that of many others, as was afterwards proven. So
he went first to Norway, and thence to Denmark, and never stayed on
his way till he went south and sought the holy apostle Peter in his
own place, and afterwards he turned back thence and came to Denmark
on the day of the Lord's Passion. And king Swein was still alive,
and he sought to him to see him.

2. And when he was come to the place where the king was, it was then
told him that the king was at mass. But the priest that was to sing
the mass began to read the Passion as the holy John came into the
church. But he read the lesson so slowly and with such difficulty
that they that stood by thought it heavy and wearisome to hear. But
when the holy John found that the priest was well-nigh become a
laughing-stock to men, then he laid a stole over his shoulders,
and walked up to the priest and took the book out of his hand in
lowly fashion, and read the Passion so nobly and clearly that all
they that stood by marvelled. And when the service was over the king
sent after him, and asked him to him, and bade him stay a long while
with him, and paid him so great honour that he put him next himself,
and was pleased that he should stay with him as long as he would,
and indeed he stayed with him a good while.

3. During the time while the holy John was with king Swein he was
honoured by God with noble forebodings, and one day when he came
to the king's table, he himself told the king what he had seen in
a dream. 'Methought in the night that I was standing in a certain
cathedral of marvellous splendour, and in the choir of the church,
as it were in the bishop's seat, I saw our Lord Jesus Christ sitting,
and on a foot-stool at His feet I saw the holy king David sitting,
and smiting his harp with most noble skill and most fair music;
and indeed I think, my lord, that there hath remained in my mind
somewhat of that fair music that he made. Now do thou, my lord, let
them bring me a harp, and I will try before thee if I can remember
somewhat of the music he made.' Then the king bade them bring a harp
and give it to John, and he took the harp and tuned it, and smote it
with so great skill that the king himself and all they that stood by
cried out how well he played. All to whom this was told thought this
thing to be of great import, and all they praised Almighty God that
deigneth to manifest the glory of His saints.

4. Nor can this be left out how great succour the Icelanders got
both abroad and at home from the holy bishop John. We will tell this
first, how he found out and brought back from abroad hither along
with him Sæ-mund Sigfusson, the man that of all others hath been
of the greatest profit to God's Church in this country, when he had
been away so long that there were no news at all of him. But the holy
John got news of him, and brought him back with him from the south,
and they both journeyed together from the south out hither to their
kinsfolk and their foster-land.

5. When the holy John was abroad this time king Magnus, the son of Olaf
[the Quiet], the son of Harold Sigurdsson, was ruling over Norway,
and when John came north into Thrond-ham the king was there. At that
time there were in Norway many Icelanders, and Tait the son of bishop
Gizor was there then. And it came to pass that a man of Iceland,
whose name was Gisl [Illuge's son the poet], slew a man, and the man
that was slain was a house-carl of king Magnus. But Gisl was driven to
this rash deed because he had to avenge his father, and the man whom
Gisl slew was named Giaf-wald [Gieb-wald]; he had been at the slaying
of Illuge, Gisl's father. And soon after the slaying Gisl was taken
and fettered by the king's men. But when the Icelanders heard of it,
straightway they all went together to the house wherein Gisl was, Tait
being the leader of their company, and hewed off his fetters and took
him away with them. But at the news thereof the king let call a Moot,
and he was exceeding wrath, and it looked as if the matter would turn
out very badly [for the Icelanders]. At this Moot no Icelanders were
allowed to plead save holy John. The king gave him leave to speak,
and he pleaded in a long and very fine speech, and it was of such
influence that the king's wrath was abated, so that they got quarter
and peace that before were well-nigh doomed to death [1096-7].


5. 1. After this there came out hither to Iceland John and Sæ-mund,
and settled down each on his father's heritage, John at Broad-bowster,
and Sæ-mund at Ord, and there they both dwelt a very long while,
and there was brotherly love and holy communion between them, and
they were like unto one another in many good things. They were also
near of a like age, as far as we can guess, but John was two winters
the elder. They both adorned the holy churches which they had to keep
in many ways, serving them humbly in their priesthood and increasing
their rights greatly with respect to provision of clerks, so that
they should have each church served more often than it had been
before. They might also rightly be called Pillars of the Church, for
they upheld her fairly in their holy teaching, and many other goodly
endowments which went forth from them upon all them that were near
them, or that would hearken to or accept their wholesome admonitions.

2. Now the holy John was married and had two wives, and the first one
lived but a short while, and by neither had he any children that grew
up out of childhood, or that we have heard tell of.


6. 1, 2. [See Hungrv. 1. 8; Libellus, 9. 8; 10. 3.]

3. When Almighty God was minded to raise up His servant the holy
John to an higher degree of clerkly honour than he was in before, the
North-landers prayed bishop Gizor that he would set up a bishop's see
in the North-landers Quarter, because they said they were so far off,
and their Quarter was the most thickly inhabited and the greatest,
wherefore they needed most the visitations of the bishop, but could
most seldom get them. Bishop Gizor laid this matter before the men
of most understanding, and they all agreed together that it would be
a good thing to grant them their prayer, and chiefly because they
thought it would be a great support to the Church of God, and that
it would be less likely that the land should be long bishopless if
there were two bishops. Whereupon it was now settled in such wise that
bishop Gizor gave up more than a fourth part of his bishopric, to the
end that there should be a bishop's see in the North-landers Quarter,
as the North-landers had prayed. And to this office and honour and
bishopric over the North-landers Quarter and the North-landers, bishop
Gizor chose priest John Og-mund's son, with the consent of all clerks
and laymen in the North-landers Quarter. And although the holy John
at first made many excuses for not taking the office by reason of his
humility, yet at the last he gave way at the prayer of bishop Gizor,
and consented to go abroad and take bishop's orders if God would have
it so.


7. 1. Now after this there were many meetings held, and it was settled
at the end that the see of the bishop of the North-landers should
be set north in Sheltie-dale, at the homestead that is called Holar
[the knolls]. There had dwelt a worthy priest who was called Illoge
[Latinised Hilarius], and was the son of Beorn. He was the only one of
the men of worship of the North-landers Quarter to rise up from the
heritage of his fathers for God's sake and the needs of Holy Church,
because there had before been long shufflings between the chiefs as
to which of them should forsake his father's heritage and his home,
and there was none of them ready so to do save this man only. And it
is easy for all men to see that he did this for God's sake, and he
might well hope for that which must have come to pass, that God would
give him a fair mansion in everlasting bliss, which may of right be
called the heritage of good men. [Now this same Hilarius afterwards
went to Broad-bowster in West-hope, and there his body resteth,
but his soul is with God in everlasting joy.]

2. And this summer the bishop-elect took ship with the following that
was appointed for him and moneys, and he took with him a letter and
seal of bishop Gizor which bore witness to his errand. And when they
were ready they put to sea, and there is nought told of their journey
till they got to Denmark, and they had a good voyage. But John the holy
bishop-elect forthwith sought the archbishop Auzor, and came to the
place where the archbishop was, and [it was] rather late in the day.

3. The archbishop was at church at evensong, and when John the holy
bishop-elect got to church evensong was well-nigh over. He took
his place outside the choir, and began to sing evensong with his
clerks. The archbishop had forbidden all his clerks, old and young
alike, to look out of the choir while the hours were being sung, and
he set a penalty to be taken if this his command were broken. But as
soon as the archbishop heard the chanting of the holy John, he looked
out down the church trying to see who the man was that had such a
voice. But when evensong was over, the archbishop's clerks said to
him, 'How now, my lord bishop, have ye not yourself broken the rules
ye made?' The archbishop answered, 'I confess that it is true as ye
say, but yet I have not done it for nought, for a voice was borne
into my ears such as I have never heard before, and it may rather
be likened to the voice of an angel than of a man.' Whereby it may
be noted, as we have said before in this story, how far the voice of
the holy John was before that of most men, according to the judgment
of the wise. But when John had finished his evensong, then he went
to see the archbishop, and he received him worshipfully, and asked
him and his following to stay with him. And when the holy John had
been a short while with the archbishop, he set forth his errand to
the archbishop, and showed him the letter and seal of bishop Gizor;
and when they had considered the matter for certain days with other
clerks with whom the bishop wished to consider the matter, and when
the matter was thoroughly overhauled, then the archbishop spoke
to the bishop-elect: 'I perceive very well, my very dear brother,
that thou hast almost all the qualities that fit thee for a bishop;
moreover I believe that that people will be happy which may have such a
bishop over them. But by reason of one thing which thou hast told me,
that thou hast had two wives, I dare not consecrate thee without the
leave of the pope and his own cognizance thereof. Wherefore this is
our counsel herein, that thou go as quickly as may be to see the pope,
and we will write thee a letter under our seal and acquaint the pope
with thy case. And if it go so as we would hope, that he give thee
leave to take consecration [as bishop], and us leave to bestow it,
then do thou come back to me as quickly as may be, and I will then
joyfully accomplish thine errand for thee.'

5. After that John the holy bishop-elect went to the city of Rome,
and when he was come there his suit was well received by the pope. When
John came south the holy Paschalis [Pascal], second of that name, was
pope. The holy John declared all his errand to the pope, and showed
him withal the archbishop's letter and seal which acquainted the pope
with all the conditions of his case, and when the pope had seen the
writing he graciously granted the humble prayer that was made to him,
and directed the holy bishop-elect to go and see archbishop Auzor,
and wrote to him under his seal, and gave him leave to consecrate
the holy John bishop.

6. And when John had taken the pope's blessing, he went on his way
back and came with his following to see archbishop Auzor. And when he
was aware by the pope's letter, which the holy John brought from his
meeting with the pope, that he was given full freedom to consecrate
him, then the archbishop was wonderfully glad, and thanked Almighty
God that it should have been granted him to fulfil the errand of the
holy John, according to the wish of the people. And now he abode with
the archbishop till the time when he should think fit to consecrate
him. After this the archbishop calleth together the clerks that were
bound to be present at that service, and when all was prepared then he
consecrateth the holy John bishop on the Lord's-day two nights before
the mass of the two apostles Philip and James, that is the third of the
kalends of May [April 29, 1106]. After the holy John was consecrated he
dwelt with the archbishop, and received of him many helpsome counsels
profitable both to himself and to the people over whom he was set.

7. The holy John was consecrated bishop, as hath been told, when he
was four-and-fifty years old. That was in the days of pope Pascal,
and in the days of Ey-stan and Sig-urd, kings of Norway. And at that
day bishop Gizor had governed God's Church in Iceland as long as
bishop Is-laf his father, and that was four-and-twenty winters.


8. 1. Bishop John went out to Iceland the next summer after he was
consecrated, and had a good voyage, and soon after they had made
land the news of his arrival was known, and all good men were joyful
thereat, and forthwith there came together crowds to meet him. He
received every man's suit with gentleness, and showed in every way
that he had not forgotten the holy humility which was in him before
he was consecrated bishop, but rather that he had increased therein
with all other good qualities, now that more was required of him
since he had been so greatly raised by Almighty God to much honour.

2. And as soon as the holy John was ready to leave the ship he went
home to his see at Holar, and straightway began to govern well and
fairly Almighty God's Church which he was set over, and that winter he
stayed at home at his seat. But in the summer he rode to the All-moot,
and there he and bishop Gizor met with much joy, and then bishop Gizor
apprized the people how much good men had to thank God for in the
joyful tidings that had now come about that there were two bishops
in the country, which thing had never been before since Christendom
came into the land. The bishops talked over many things together that
were profitable, and put together with other clerks [help] the rules
which they should set over them that were under their care.

3. That summer bishop John began his visitation of his diocese,
and set himself to govern God's Christendom with mighty governing;
he chastised evil men with the power that was given him on God's
behalf, and strengthened good men and them of right conversation in
many good ways.



9. 1. Now the holy bishop John had sat but a short time at his
bishopstead at Holar, before he had the church that was there taken
down. This church had been made next after that which Oxe Sholto's
son had had built [c. 1030]. Men think that this church which Oxe had
made was the biggest church under wooden shingles in all Iceland;
and he [Oxe] laid out much means on this church, and had it well
fitted within and beautifully, and covered it all with lead. But this
church was all burnt with all its vestments by the secret judgment
of God. But the holy bishop John had a great and worshipful church
built at Holar, which standeth there to-day, although it has been
both covered and many other repairs made since [his day]. And the
holy bishop John spared nought in the building of this church, that
God's glory might be more than before there, and this house [of his]
might be fairly built and adorned.

2. He chose the man for the church building that was then thought to be
the most skilful. His name was Thor-odd, and he was the son of Gamle,
and it was so that both the holy John spared not to pay him great and
good wages, and he did his work well and honestly. It is told of this
man that he was so quick at learning that, when he was at his work,
he listened to the priestlings being taught the accomplishment which
is called grammatica, and it stuck so well in his ears, by reason
of his great quickness in learning and attention or application,
that he became the most accomplished man in this kind of learning.



10. 1. When John had been a short while bishop, he had a school set
up at home there at the bishopstead, west of the church door, and had
it well and beautifully built [and the mark of the houses is still
to be seen]. And to this end, to govern the school and teach them
that should be set there, he chose him a man out of Gotland that was
the best and quickest clerk: he was called Gisle, and was the son
of Finne. He paid him a great wage, both to teach the priestlings
and to give such support to holy Christendom along with the bishop
himself as he could manage in his teachings and addresses. And ever
when he was preaching before the people, he had a book lying before
him, and took therefrom what he spoke to the people, and he did
this most out of prudence and humility, because as he was young in
years those that listened might lay more store by it, when they saw
that he took what he taught out of holy books and not out of his own
natural knowledge or breast-wit. And yet so much advantage followed
his teachings that the men that listened thereto were much moved, and
made great and good changes [in their lives] by his advice. And that
which he taught in his words he showed forth also in his works. His
teachings were lenient and light to bear to all good, and the wise
thought them seemly and interesting, and to the evil they became a
great terror and a true chastisement.

2. On all the high feasts there was a great multitude there, for it
was then the great business for many men, first to hear the hours, so
fairly were they performed there, and also [to hear] the ordinances of
the bishop and his precious teachings which were so choice to hear,
whether they were spoken by the bishop himself or by this man that
hath just now been spoken of.



11. 1. But a short while had the holy John been bishop before he
began to turn men's ways and habits much into another level than that
they had been in before. He became full of chastisement to men of
ill-life, but he was blithe and gentle to all good men, and showed
in himself that all which he taught in his words he fulfilled in his
work. It appeared to wise men that knew his ways that he was seldom
unmindful of that which the Lord spake to His disciples, Luceat lux
vestra ... [Math. v. 16]. These words go thus: 'Let your light shine
before men, so that they may see your good works, and glorify your
Father which is in heaven.'

2. And the holy bishop John strongly enjoined that which hath been kept
since, that men should come to hours on holidays and other set days,
and he bade the priests to repeat oftentimes those things which they
needed to know. He bade men keep a daily custom, as beseems Christian
men, that is to go every day, late or early, to a cross or church,
and there mindfully to put up one's prayers. He bade them to have
each in his lodging the mark of the holy cross as a safeguard to
himself, and as soon as a man woke he was to sign himself and sing
first Credo in Deum [the creed], and thus speak his belief in Almighty
God, and walk all day after armed with the mark of the holy cross,
with which he marked himself as soon as he woke, and never to take
sleep or meat or drink without signing himself beforehand. He bade
every man to learn Pater Noster and Credo in Deum, and Mary's Verse
[Ave Maria], and remember his hours seven times a day, according as
David the prophet saith, Septies in die laudem tibi dixi, Domine
Deus meus [Ps. cxix. 164], that is to be interpreted in Northern
[speech]--'Seven times a day I have spoken praise to thee, O Lord my
God,' and dutifully sing every evening ere he slept Credo in Deum
and Pater Noster. And that we may end this discourse in few words,
he got the ways of the people under him so ordered within a short
space by God's help, that holy Christendom hath never stood in such
blossom in the North-landers Quarter, neither before nor since as it
stood then, when the people were so blessed in having such a bishop's
government over them.

3. Moreover he forbade altogether all evil customs and heathendom
and sacrifices, magic and charms, and stood up against them with all
his might, for it was not altogether done away with while Christendom
was young.

He also forbade all omens, which the men of old [heathens] had been
wont to take from the coming of the moon and [observance of] days,
and dedicating days to heathen men or gods--as it is when they are
called Tew's-day, Woden's-day, or Thor's, and so of all the weekdays;
but he bade men to keep the reckoning which the holy fathers have
set in the scriptures, and call them the Second Day of the week,
and the Third Day, and so on--and all other things beside, which he
thought sprung from ill roots.

4. There was a play men used much, which was unseemly, wherein a man
must recite to a woman, and a woman to a man, verses foul and light
and not fit to listen to, and this he had abolished and altogether
forbade it to be done. Love-poems and songs he would not hear recited
or have recited, but he could not get rid of them altogether.

[Double text, B.] This play was dear to men before the holy John was
bishop, wherein a man would recite to a woman in the dance effeminate
and satirical poems, and a woman to a man love-verses. This play he
had abolished and strongly forbade it.

5. It is told that he came to hear that Clong Thor-stan's son (he that
was afterwards bishop in Scal-holt), when he was a priestling and
young in years, was reading a book that is called Ovidius, De Arte
[Amatoriâ]. In this book there is much love-poetry, and he forbade
him to read this kind of book, saying that it was heavy work enough
for every man to keep himself from fleshly lust and unlawful love,
even if he did not irritate his mind with any poetry [Latin] or poems
[vernacular] of this kind.

6. He was also diligent in pursuing men's evil ways, and he went
about hourly to do this, that well-nigh no man came to see him but he
managed in some way to better his ways by reason of his godly love,
and the pains he took to help every man. And when he set men hard
penance by reason of great offences, and they underwent them well
and humbly, it was not long before his holy breast that the Holy
Ghost had chosen for His dwelling was pained by their afflictions,
and he would lighten their penance in some way. And those men whom
he had interdicted by reason of his godly love and zeal, those same
he would restore mercifully when they had forsaken their faults. And
he that loved all the people under him as his brothers and sons, did
not batten on or profit by any of their faults or distresses, but he
rejoiced when it went well with them, and condoled over all that went
otherwise. He was so kind-hearted that he could hardly bear to see
or know that a man was in trouble, and so generous and open-handed
with the poor, that his peer could scarce be found. He was a true
father to all poor folk, he comforted the widows and the fatherless,
and never came one in such distress to see him but he got comfort of
some kind from his means. He was of such loving carriage to all men,
that there was well-nigh no man that would oppose him, and that was
more for the sake of the godly love that all men bore him than for
bodily fear. And inasmuch as he crushed his own desire in manifold
wise, and did God's will, if he found that it did not conform thereto
by reason of bodily lust, therefore God repaid him at once then in
yoking beneath him all the people under him in holy obedience. And
the holy John lived his life according to divine ordinance and good
men's judgment or example; he was at his prayers night and day and
fasted long, and mortified himself in many ways to the end that he
might yield more profit to God than before out of those things that
had been committed to his hand.



12. 1. And to this end that he might be more freer than before to
keep the hours and ordinances, and to perform the other things by
which God's Christendom or Church was most maintained, he chose him
men to look after the [bishop]stead with him, that should overlook
that which belonged to the stead along with that noble lady, whose
name was Wal-dis, whom he had wedded before.

2. One of them was a worshipful priest, whose name was Heah-mund,
Beorn's son; he was the grandfather of Hilda, nun and anchoress [as
shall be told of later in this discourse]. Next to Heah-mund in the
administration was the priest whose name was Healte, and he was a
kinsman of the bishop. Of laymen there was one in the administration
with them that was of noble family, his name was Orn, and he was
the son of Thor-lac of Withe-mere. These men took chief care of what
appertained to the stead, and appointed men their occupations, some
to gathering to the stead all that was thought needful. Some were set
to work, some to serve the poor (and the bishop was strict in this
that this should be mercifully done), some to receive the guests,
because at any feast or high-tide there would come to see the bishop
a hundred or whiles two hundred men, and sometimes more, for the holy
John moreover had laid it down that he was not satisfied save every
man in his hundred or diocese, that had the use of his feet, came to
him at the least once in the twelve-months to visit the bishopstead at
Holar. By reason of which there was such a multitude there on Maundy
or Sheer-monday and Easter, that there were not less than four hundred
[480] persons altogether, men and women. And although many of these
men had provisions with them, there were many more that were at the
bishop's cost, and were fulfilled of him both with spiritual and
bodily food, and strengthened by his bishoply blessing they used to
go away with joy to their own home.

3. Many men of good conversation moved their homes to the bishopstead,
and paid money of their own [for their keep], but some kept themselves,
in order to hear the bishop's teachings and the performance of the
hours. And they made their houses round about the churchyard.

4. Holy bishop John took many men as disciples, and gave them good
masters to teach them: Gisle Finsson, whom we spoke of before, to
teach grammatica; and Rikine the priest a Frenchman, his chaplain
and dear friend, to teach singing and verse-making, because he was a
most learned man. There was well-nigh no house then, but there was
some occupation going on within it that was profitable. It was the
elder men's custom to teach the younger, and the younger were writing
between their lessons. They were all of one mind and did not fall
out, and never envied each other, and as soon as the hours were sung
they all came and performed their hours with great attention. There
was nothing to be heard in the choir but fair song and holy prayer,
for the elder men knew well how to behave, and the children were so
chastised by their masters that they dared not behave naughtily.

5. These are the clerks that were bred up under the hands of bishop
John: Clong, that was before-named, who was afterwards bishop in
Scal-holt, and adorned the bishopstead by his making of books. And he
was there through the days of bishop Cetil, and also of bishop Beorn,
in friendship with all good men. There was taught also Wil-mund, the
first abbot at Thing-ore, and abbot Hran [third of Thing-ore]. There
was taught also bishop Beorn, who was the third bishop of Holar. Many
other worshipful clerks were bred up and taught there, although we
do not name them.



13. 1. When the holy bishop John had been a short while set in his
bishop-stool, the estate of men became very hard. There pressed upon
them a great famine, and much [polar] ice and cold seasons, so that the
earth was not green at the spring-moot [c. May 15]. And the holy bishop
John went to the spring-moot that was at Thing-ore, and when he came
there then he made a vow for good seasons, with the consent of all men,
that they would raise a church and homestead and all contribute till
the stead was established. After this vow the holy John put off his
cloak and himself marked out the foundation wall for the church. And
men's estate turned to the better straightway, so that that same week
all the ice was gone from which the famine had in great part come,
so that none could be seen, and the earth began to grow green at once,
and that same week there was sheep-pasture well-nigh sufficient.

2. This thing happened at the homestead at Holar, that there was
a stall in the byre in which it would not do to tie up kine, for
every one lay dead in the morning that had been tied up the evening
before. It happened one harvest-tide that the holy bishop John went
with his steward to settle which cattle were to be kept [through the
winter] of them that should be stalled at the homestead; and when
they had fixed this, the herdsman told him particularly that the
kine would not have room enough, inasmuch as one stall was unclean
[haunted]. The bishop said it should be so as he said and had fixed,
and told him that he was to tie kine in that stall as [he did] in the
others, and so it was done. But the morning after, when they came to
the byre, there lay a cow in that very stall and she was dead. The
bishop was told of this, and he bade them tie up another beast there,
and then a third, and they died. Then the herdsman said to the bishop,
'How long is it to go on in this way?' The bishop answers, 'It shall
go on as long as there are any kine left, if God will that the place
be wasted in this way.' After that it stopped, and so bishop John
won a victory over this evil oppression by his faith and steadfastness.

3. It happened on a certain spring that the spring was so late that
the earth was but of little verdure at the flitting-days [end of
May]. Then the holy bishop John rode to the All-moot and made a vow
for the bettering of the seasons for men on John the Baptist's day
[June 24]. And when he had made his vow and plighted it, he followed
it with these words, 'I would that God would give us dew now at once,'
and thereby it was manifest that he was a man that could not bear to
wait. The summer had been droughty up to then, so that there had not
fallen any dew, wherefore there was next to no grass. And when the
holy bishop John made his vow the weather was then fine and clear,
and not a speck to be seen in the heavens. But when he began the
Gloria in excelsis that day at mass there came so great a rain from
heaven that men thought it unbearable to be out of doors by reason of
the wet weather. Thenceforward through the summer there were dews by
night and sunshine by day, and so it went on for some time, and the
grass crop was a middling one that summer.

4. This holy bishop John then was granted by God many markworthy
portents or omens and fair visions, and it was not very wonderful that
there were many markworthy things shown to him in dreams, for he took
no more sleep than the least he could do with, and his mind was ever
[set] before he slept and immediately he awoke on God's service and
holy offices of prayer.

5. He had a vision the same night that there died south in Scal-holt
priest Thor-kel, his foster-brother, who was called by a second name
Trandill. He was the most worthy clerk. It happened after evensong,
when the holy bishop was come to bed, and as soon as ever he laid
his head on to the pillow there fell a drowsiness upon him, and he
thought that a man came in whom he did not know, and took his stand
in the middle of the hall. He thought that this man was asked by
them that were there if he could tell any tidings, and he said,
'Thor-kel sainted.' He spake no more. The bishop woke and sprang
up at once and called to Rikinne his arch-priest, and spake to him,
'Rise up, brother, and let us go to church and praise Almighty God,
for priest Thor-kel our brother is now departed out of this life,
and let us commend his soul to the hands of Almighty God.' They had
heard that he was sick. Then they went to church and did the office for
the dead, and then he told the priest Rikinne the vision he had had.


[Quotation from Libellus follows in MS.]

6. Once on a time, when holy bishop John had laid him down one night
to sleep, he had this vision. He thought that he was at his prayers
before a great rood-cross, and straightway he thought that the image
on the cross bent itself down to him, and spake certain words in his
ear, and we know not what they were. This vision he told to Rikinne
the priest, and there was no one that could interpret it. But the
next day after there came to see the holy bishop John certain men,
newly come from the sea, bringing him a book. In this book was this
event written which was then little known in this land. It was said
that the Jews had tortured the image of our Lord Jesus Christ on a
cross in that city which is called Beyrout, after the manner in which
they had aforetime tortured our Lord Jesus Christ [himself]. They
beat the image with lashes and spat upon it, and slapped it on
the neck. After that they fastened it to the cross, and then went
before the cross mocking the image, after the ensample of the Jews
aforetime. After that they took a spear and thrust it cruelly into
the side of the image. Then came to pass a marvellous thing and never
heard of before. Water mingled with blood ran out of the side of the
image, and by this water and blood many sick folk gat health. And
when the Jews beheld this thing all together they repented with all
their heart and turned to God. And when holy bishop John and priest
Rikinne had read this thing, the priest spake to the bishop smiling,
'See here now, father, the dream that the Lord showed thee in the
night!' 'It is true,' says the bishop, 'and let us praise God!' And
then they both praised the Lord Jesus Christ.

*    *    *    *    *    *

14. 1. But when the time was come when Almighty God was minded to give
an everlasting reward to the holy bishop John for the toil and trouble
with great tribulations which he had borne for God's sake, then the
holy bishop John fell ill, and of this same illness he departed this
life. The illness was not violent, but he was able to set in order
and consider all things as he wished them to be. And when he lay in
this illness and was not yet anointed, there came to him one of his
disciples, a good scribe and a man beloved, a priest in orders. His
name was Thor-ward, and he was called Knop of Knop-dale. He had with
him a book which he had written and made for a priest that was at
that time far away, and he had prayed him much to make the book, and
they had agreed between them that the bishop should set a price on the
book and the priest should buy it at that price. The bishop welcomed
the priest and spake blithely to him: 'Come to me, my son, and give
thy father the kiss of peace ere that I die like other brothers of
thine.' Then the priest went up to him and kissed him. After that
he showed him the book, and told him what they had agreed between
them as to his fixing the price, and prayed him to put a price on the
book. The bishop looked at the book and praised it much, and then said,
'Good is this book, and well is it written, but it is not granted to
him to have the book. Some other man will get it.' The priest answers,
'Why, father? Do thou put a price on it, and he will gladly pay that
for it, for he prayed me much to make him such a book.' The bishop
answers, 'I will do this if thou wilt, and put a price on the book,
but there is no need so to do, for this same priest that thou didst
mean the book for is now dead.' It was some while between this and
the time when the news came of the death of this same priest. And
he was dead at the time when the bishop spake of his death. All men
thought it a great thing that the holy bishop John should know such
a thing when he was far away from where it happened.

2. And now the holy bishop John began to sink fast, and though his
strength was ebbing out, yet he kept ever his offices of prayer as
long as he could speak. After that he had himself anointed, and
there were present all the clerks that were at the bishop's see,
and other of his friends. He had already before ordered what he
thought most convenient to be done. After that he let them give him
corpus Domini, and when he had tasted thereof then he first sung this
communio, Refecti ... eternam. After that he began the psalm Benedicam
... meo. These words run thus: 'I will praise the Lord every hour,
and his praise shall ever be in my mouth' [Ps. vulg. xxxiii. 1]. And
as he had this psalm in his mouth, and his tongue was yet moving with
these holy words, his spirit departed from his body, and was borne of
God's angels to that bliss that was prepared for him by Almighty God,
and there he shall praise Almighty God for ever with other holy men,
as he promised in the psalm which he sung last.

3. Now the holy bishop John departed out of this world into everlasting
bliss on Saturday, ix kal. Maii [April 23]. There were then gone from
the birth of Christ eleven hundred and fourteen winters [1121]. He
was hallowed bishop when he was four winters of the sixth ten [52],
and he sat in his bishopric fifteen winters. And when he had lived in
this world threescore winters and nine altogether, he died at a good
age. It was in the days of pope Calixtus the second of that name. It
was also in the days of Ey-stan and Sig-urd kings of Norway, but their
brother king O-laf was already dead. Bishop Thor-lac, Run-olf's son,
was then bishop in Scal-holt.

4. The clerks that were present took good and fit care of the body of
the holy bishop John [and arrayed him in a bishop's raiment], and when
it was gone so far that the body was arrayed and made ready for the
burial and the dirge song, and it was at the point to be carried out,
then went those of the clerks that were to bear it, and took hold of
the bier and tried to lift it up. Then that came about which all men
that were there thought a great thing--the body became so heavy that
they could in no wise lift it that were appointed to bear it. This gave
them great concern, and they reasoned among themselves what might be
the reason thereof. Then spake one of the clerks well and thoughtfully,
and said, 'This thing must be the punishment of some fault of ours,
and we must have done something unworshipfully in our service to our
bishop. Now seek diligently whether he have all those things in his
array that were fit and belonged to his consecration.' Then they
sought and made search until they found that they had not put his
finger-ring on the hand of the holy bishop John, but it was lying
there on the daïs. Then they took the ring and put it on his hand,
and after that the same men as before went up and easily lifted the
body and bore it to the burial.

5. The body of the holy bishop John was buried outside the church, on
the south of the choir [B: outside the church eastward, near to the
south wall of the choir], and a vault made over it. There his bones
lay fourscore winters and somewhat less, until God made manifest his
glory by fair tokens, and his halidom was taken out of the ground. Then
lord Brand the bishop had him worshipfully taken up and brought into
the church, and appointed worshipfully with much glory to the praise
of our Lord Jesus Christ. May he glorify himself for the sake of the
worthiness of this holy friend of his and his prayers, in freeing us
from evil and jeopardous things, and when we depart out of this world
gather our souls to his elect. Grant this, God Almighty, that liveth
and reigneth one God in Trinity, per omnia secula seculorum. Amen.










CHAPTER 5

§ 5. SECOND LIFE OF THORLAC.

In the middle or latter half of the 13th century some ecclesiastic,
finding that the active life of Thorlac had not been recorded,
and taking it to be of singular value to those of his day who were
engaged in similar conflicts, was minded to supply the lacuna,
as he says in his second prologue,--'In the old setting forth of
the story it seemeth to us that he [Thorlac] hath hardly gotten a
worthy remembrance of those trials and sufferings that he underwent
at the hands of his adversaries that arose to the hurt of the Church
during his bishopric. For of this matter, we think, less hath been
told than we could wish.' 'That good man [would he had given the
name!] who first wrote the Life, begins thus.' His own mode of work
was, taking the older Life to put a new prologue at its head, and
then insert in the body of the work a long and well-told history
of Thorlac's political difficulties, in a brisk, vigorous style,
without any disguise or concealment even in the case of good bishop
Paul's birth, or the conduct of his near kinsfolk, which he touches
on fearlessly and frankly. His point of view marks the change from
primitive to medieval Church sympathies and theories, the severance
of the Church from the great houses being accompanied with the rise
of a new class of churchmen who were not contented with the position
they found themselves occupying, but resolved that a change should be
made regardless of the cost to themselves or others. His additional
matter is in AM. 382 inscribed 'Oddaverja-Þáttr,' from the family
that are chiefly concerned in the struggle with the bishop.

The latter part of the MSS. of this type which follow after the
interpolation are, it happens, better than Cod. Holm. 5, in that
their scribes have not shortened the text.

If the words inserted, p. 462, 1. 4, 'then people came to the All-moot
earlier than now,' are not a gloss, the date would fall after 1271. The
four first chapters, as also ch. 6. 4, remind one of bishop Arne's Saga
when at its best. It is indeed difficult to realise how the artificial,
ornamental preface (here given in small type and not translated),
and the pithy, matter-of-fact 'Oddaverja-Þáttr,' could have flowed
from the same pen, yet so it must be; one represents the foreign
Latin ecclesiastical fashion of the day, the other the regular Saga
style of the vernacular Icelandic.

Besides the 'Oddaverja-Þáttr,' the author adds next to nothing, for the
clauses, pp. 474, 480, are, one thinks, mere omissions on the part of
the A-text, as is the clause on Macan (p. 478), which is found in our
a. The only clauses are--the glass windows (p. 477), and three clauses
given on the following page, viz. the parting gift of earl Erling
specified, the tailoring after the fashion of the archbishop's clothes
(hardly likely to be true), and the clause on the archbishop's message.

The chief MS. of this second form of the Life is AM. 382, a vellum
of mid-fourteenth century, which Arne Magnusson got from Thorlac's
birth-place, Hlidarende. It has reached us in loose quaternions,
folds of which have ever and anon fallen out and perished, one fold
(p. 575, l. 7) and three folds (p. 585, l. 3). These blanks we can
fill up partly from two vellum fragments, each containing a single
fold of lost old sister MSS., now preserved in a capsa AM. 383. Their
help is again supplemented by a modern vellum volume (made by one
of bishop Thorlac Sculason's scribes, middle of the 17th century,
from lost originals), which is referred to above, AM. 379. It is
called C in the Editor's edition of 1858.

The Miracle Book of S. Thorlac, which is earlier than his Life, and
indeed one of the chief instruments in his national canonization,
must be mentioned here, though for its text we must refer the reader
to the Editor's Biskopa Sogor, vol. i, Copenhagen, 1858. It is thus
mentioned: [[263, 274, 275: 12.]] 'At the same All-moot (A.D. 1199),
at the request of the people, bishop Paul had read the miracles of
the blessed bishop Thorlac which are written here in this book.' And
it is most probable that AM. 645 is one of the copies issued in that
or the following year. But there are fresh editions, as it were, and
abridgments of Thorlac's miracles suffixed to every account of his
Life. All the various confused forms in which it occurs are printed
in Biskopa Sogor. The miracles are of the usual type, and the style
is oftentimes puerile and commonplace. They add no new facts to those
recorded in the two Lives, and are altogether outside the scope of
our present work.





Incipit Prologus.

Í nafne Foðor ok Sonar ok Heilags Anda byrjaz her prologus
epter-farande sogo hver saman stendr af lífe ok iartegnom virðolegs
herra Þorláks biskops Þórhallz sonar, er sannlega má segjaz primas
þessa lannz firer þá grein, at Dróttenn várr Jesus Christus, sannr
Guð ok sannr maðr, valðe hann fyrstan til þess af ollom réttlátom
monnom sínom á þesso lande at skína efalauslega í heilagleiks frægð,5
birtande hans dýrðar-fulla verðleika með háleitom stór-táknom. Þessa
heilaga mannz líf má cristnom manne vera svá sem en skýrasta skugg-sió
til epter-dæmes, þvi at Guð Dróttenn sýner þat með þeim iartegnom,
sem veitaz firer hans verðleika, at þesse blezaðe biskop hefer réttan
boðorðanna veg genget. Má þat ok skilja af hans sogo, at í ser-hverjom
stétt síns lífs, frá bernsko ok til ens hæsta kennimannskapar,10 hefer
hann auðgaðr veret góðom verkom um fram flesta aðra ser samtiða, þó
at fyrra hlut sínna lífdaga sýndez hann fylgja heimenom fyrer nockora
grein, þá var hann þó allt eins hlýðenn Guðe ok hans logmále. En svá
sem hann var biskop orðenn, fágaðe hann fagrlega ásiáno Skalholltensis
cristne með setningo boðorða sínna, brot sníðande lýte lastanna. Þesse
same Guðs iáttare, skínande ok15 ilmande með sínom heilagleik, vere
nærre várom fram-burðe með síno árnaðar-orðe, at ver megem maklega
hlute skrifa, Guðe til lofs ok dýrðar, sialfom ser til sæmðar ok
virðingar, ollom heyrandom monnom til góðrar ok andlegrar huggunar.

Þat dregr oss miok til at skrifa líf ok iartegner þessa virðolegs
herra ok andalegs foðor, at í fornom fram-burðe sogonnar virðez oss
hann varla hafa verðoga20 minning af þeim þrautom ok meingerðom, sem
hann hefer þolat af sínom mót-stoðo-monnom þeím sem upp vóðo [1763]
á kirkionnar skaða í hans biskopsdóme; ok af þesso efne þiker oss
minna talet en ver vildem. Enn hinn góðe maðr, sem í fyrsto hefer
soguna setta, byrjar svá sitt mál:--Á þeim tíma, etc.....




1. Herra Þorlákr þá af iarlenom hvít skinn ok silke ifer dreget,
ok logðo þeir25 feðgar mikla virðing alla tíma síðan til ens sæla
Þorláks biskops, ok fálo sik under hans bæner....

2. Þorlákr biskop lét ser semja oll klæðe eptir klæðom Eysteins
erki-biskops ok helt þvílíkom buningi meðan hann lifðe.

3. Þat er ok greinanda, at herra Eysteinn erki-biskop opinberaðe hónum
sínn30 boðskap með brefom til Íslannz, at aller staðir er epter fornom
vana heldozt af leikmonnom, skylde nú aller vera under biskopa valde,
efter þeim skilninge sem hann sagði vátta postolanna reglo ok setningar
heilagra Feðra. Ok ifer svá greindom [[280: 17, 18.]] boðskap fær
hann hónom sín opin bréf kirkjonnar rétte framan at fylgja um allt
Scalhollz biskopsdæme; hver ny-vígðr biskop, sæll Þorlákr, við tekr
ok tracterar, flytr ok framm berr; sem síðarr mun greina í þesse sogo.


Second Prologue.


En nú saker þess at greint er nokkot af sælo siðferðe þessa blezaða
biskops, ok eige síðr af hans biskoplegre roeksemd, með heilagre
hófsemd, því er vel5 fallet þesso næst, at með eiginlego mále ok
at-burðom heyrezt þeir váttar, er þat prófa hverso maklegr Þorlákr
var at bera hirðes nafnet; ok reiknaz eilíflega mille þeirra biskopa,
er framm fylgðo logom Almáttigs Guðs í fremsta megne; ok eige hlífðo
heldr sialfs síns líkama undan ofsóknar-sverðe; þó at Guð, er oll
hefer volden, skipe bæðe fyrir sína ásián rosas ok lilia ser til lofs
ok dýrðar. Er þetta10 harðla líteð ok stutt sem ver inn setjom, saker
fá-fræðis, hiá því sem hann hefir efne til gefet í sínom valdz-dogom
ok ifir-ferðum á fimmtán árum. Ok því skal nú þar byrja sogona,
sem hann er ný kominn til Íslannz.


ODDAVERJA-ÞÁTTR.

1. 1. Þá er Þorlákr biskop hinn helge hafðe seteð einn vetr at
stóle sínom, byrjaðe hann ifer-ferð sína um sumaret15 epter til
Austfiarða. Ok er hann kom suðr um Lóma-gnúps-sand, tók hann gisting
at Svína-felle. Þar bió þá Sigurðr Orms son, mikels háttar maðr af
veraldar metnaðe, auðegr ok ætt-stórr: var herra biskope þar vel
fagnat, sem vera átte. En saker þess at bónde vilde þar láta kirkjo
vígja, þá kallaðe biskop hann til tals við sik um20 morginenn epter,
ok bar framm boðskap herra Eysteins erki-biskops, þann sem hann bauð
hónom, under sítt vald at heimta allar kirkjor ok kirkna-fé í síno
biskopsdæme. Sigurðr tók þesso fiarre; ok sagðez eige mundo iá undan
ser því sem hann hafðe áðr frialslega haldet saker landz-skapar ok
fornrar hefðar. Biskop25 sagðe, at skipan sialfra postolanna gaf
hónum vald ifer aollom Guðs eignom fyr útan alla grein. 'Heilager
feðr Cristnennar, ok pá­farner [[281: 18.]] postolanna epter-komendr,
hafa þetta sama boðet ok skipat í kirkjonnar laogom um alla Cristnena:
svá ok hefer nú páfenn boðet Eysteine erki-biskope at flytja þetta
sama eyrende í Norege; ok þat hefer þar framm genget. Er þat ok eige
rétt eða þolanlegt, at þetta et fátæka land stande eige under einom
laogom ok þar.'5 Sigurðr svarar at 'Norroener menn eða útlender mega
eige iátta undan oss várom réttindum.' Þá svarar biskop: 'Sá skildage
sem ó-fróðer menn hafa her goerfan, at skilja ser vald ifer þeim hlutom
sem þeir hafa áðr Guðe gefet, er af sialfum laogonum ú-máttolegr, ok á
eige at haldaz; ok þar sem þetta mál verðr laoglega kært af10 biskopom,
ero þeir menn eige í þeirra manna taolo sem hialpar eigo ván af Guðe,
síðan þeir haldaz í þeirre þriózko; ok hverer sem tí­under eða heilagra
manna eigner halda með þráe, þeir ero bann­setjande epter laoglegar
á-minningar, ef þeir vilja eige sættaz ok af láta sínom rangendom.'15

Leið þá á dagenn, svá at bónde sá, at kirkjo-vígslan mynde enge
verða nema hann léte af síno mále. Snoere hann nú á svinn ráðeno, ok
leggr máldaga kirkjonnar ok sialfa hána í vald biskops. Vígðe hann
þá kirkjona, ok soeng messo. Ok epter messona skipaðe hann Sigurðe
staðenn í lén um stundar saker, ok hann iár hónom at20 halda.

2. Fór biskop þaðan til Rauða-loekjar; bió þar Ormr enn Gamle;
hóf hann þar slíkt tilkall sem at Svína-felle, fór ok miok á [[282:
19.]] einn hátt, at Ormr lagðe kirkjo-forráð under biskop, en hann
skipaðe hónum: ok skildoz viner.

3. Þorlákr biskop fór þaðan til Austfiarða með sama efne, ok haofðo
flester saomo svaor firer ser þeir er á staoðom sáto. En þó at marger
være treger til at iá undan ser sínar erfðer, þá kom þó      55 í
einn stað niðr, at Þorlákr biskop feck forræðe á aollom staoðom fyr
austan Hiorleifs-haofða, útan at Þváttá ok Hallorms-staoðom. Ok þat
hefer þar haldez iafnan síðan.



2. 1. Í þann tíma réð Ioan Loptz son fyrer Odda, sá er þá var mestr
haofðinge á Íslande: hann var goðorðz10 maðr; hann var hinn vísaste
maðr á clerklegar lister þær sem hann hafðe numet af sínom forellrom;
hann var diácn at vígslo, radd-maðr mikell í heilagre kirkjo. Lagðe
hann ok mikenn hug á, at þær kirkjor være sem bezt setnar, er hann
hafðe forræðe yfer, at aollom hlutom. Fullr var hann af flestom
í-þróttom þeim er maonnom15 vóro tíðar í þann tíma. Metnaðar-maðr var
hann svá mikell ok kappsamr, at varla varð meire, þvi at hann vilde
firer engom vægja, eða af því láta sem hann tók upp. Kono átte hann
ser er Halldóra hét, ok var Brannz dótter: son þeirra var Sæmundr.

2. Ioan var miok fengenn firer kvenna-ást; þvi at hann átte20 marga
sono aðra með ymsom konom: Þórsteinn ok Hallbiaorn [1764], Sigurðr ok
Einarr. En Póll, er síðan varð biskop, ok Ormr, er [[282: 19.]] síðan
bió á Breiða-bólstað, vóro syner þeirra Ioans ok Ragneiðar Þórhallz
dóttor, systor Þorláks biskops: haofðo þau Ioan elskaz frá barnæsko;
þó átte hon við fleirom maonnom baorn. Vóro þeir þá frum-vaxte,
Póll ok Ormr syner þeirra Ioans ok Ragneiðar, er Þorlákr biskop kom
til Íslannz með biskops-tign. Bió5 Póll í Ytra-Skarðe; en Ormr á
Breiða-bólstað. Laongom helt Ioan Ragneiðe heima í Odda.

3. Í þann tíma hafðe Ioan komezt at Haofða-brecko-lande er eitt-hvert
þótte bezt vera, áðr en Haofð-á spillte. Þar hafðe út-synnings-stormr
broteð tvær kirkjor; en nú hafðe Ioan þar goera láteð10 nýja kirkjo,
ok miok vandaða at smíð; átte heilagr Þorlákr biskop þar gisting
at taka þat sama haust sem hann kom af Aust-fiaorðom, ok fyrr var
frá sagt. Var ætlat at hann skilde þar kirkjo vígja: þar var búen
vegleg veizla móte hónom. Ok at á-kveðnom dege kemr hann þar með síno
faoro-neyte: Ioan var þar firer ok marger15 aðrer mikels-háttar menn.

4. Um morginenn bióz biskop til kirkjo-vígslo; en Ioan ok þeir menn
sem í ráðe vóro með hónom, gengo til biskops, ok var talat um epter
siðvenjo [1765] hverr-kirkjo-máldage skilde vera. Herra biskop spurðe,
svá sem fylgjande réttendom, hvárt Ioan hefðe heyrðan20 erki-biskops
boðskap um kirkna-eigner. Ioan svaraðe: 'Heyra má-ek erki-biskops
boðskap, en ráðenn em-ek í at halda hann at [[283: 19.]] engo; ok eige
hygg-ek at hann vile betr né vite, en míner forellrar, Sæmundr enn
Fróðe ok syner hans. Mun-ek ok eige firer-dæma fram-ferðer biskopa
várra her í lande, er sæmðo þann lannz sið, at leik-menn réðo þeim
kirkjom, er þeirra forellrar gáfo Guðe, ok skilðo ser vald ifer
ok síno af-kvæme.' Biskop svaraðe slíkom5 skynsemðom sem fyrr vóro
lesnar ok maorgom aoðrom, svá segjande: 'Vel veizt þú þat, Ioan, ef
þú vilt saonno fylgja, at biskop á kirkjo-eignom at ráða ok tíundom,
epter setningom Postolanna, ok annarra heilagra feðra; ok þvi at
leik-menn mego ecke ifer þeim hlutom vald eignaz, þá má þeim þat vald
aldre meðr fornre hefð10 frelsaz; vænter-ek, at for-menn kirkjonnar,
þá sem firer oss hafa veret, afsake þat miok, at þeim var eige boðet
af sínom ifer-maonnom, at kalla kirkjor ok tiunder under sítt vald
... [1766] ok því ero þeir bannsetjande sem tíundom eðr Guðs eignom
halda með þriózko móte biskopa vilja ok sam-þycke.' Ioan svaraðe:
'Þer15 megot kalla þann bann-settan sem þer vilet, en aldre mun-ek í
yðvart vald iá mínne eign undan mer, minne kirkjo eða meire, þeirre
sem ek hefer vald ifer.'

5. Enn var aonnor grein millem þeirra ok stóð út af Haofðár-hlaupe;
þvi at hon hafðe teket marga bæe þá er þangat lágo under,20 ok
tvá þá er kirkjor vóro á: varð af því minne tiund, ok fære hús til
brot-soengs; vilde Ioan firer því, at eige være meir en einn prestr ok
[[284: 19.]] diacn at kirkjonne; en áðr vóro tveir prestar, ok tveir
diácnar. Lét herra biskop þat leiðaz firer þessa saomo skynseme; en um
hina fyrre grein hélt hvárr á síno mále; ok leið miok á dagenn. En þeir
sem létoz vera beggja viner, báðo biskop leggja af síno male; ok aoll
alþýða dró þat sama, saker forns ú-vana. Ok er Þorlákr biskop5 sá þat,
at hann mynde eige at sinne framm koma síno mále, þá sprutto þesse orð
af munne hónom: 'Þó at ó-þolanlegt sé, ef firer rétta dómendr kemr,
at þú drager kirkjonnar forráð under þik, [1767] efter lannz-sið, ok
undan biskopom: þá er miklo ó-þolanlegra þat, er biskopar fá eige frá
þer teket hór-konor þínar, þær sem þú heldr10 móte aollom lannz sið;
kann vera þú ráðer eno meira, ef þú ræðr eno minna, þó at þú viler
verr.' Því hyggja menn at Þorlákr biskop mælte þesse orð, at hann fann
at alþýðan fylgðe Ioane um kirkjo-málen; vægðe hann þvi at sinne,
at hann sá engan á-vaoxt á vera, þótt hann helde framm; en mikenn
skaða á marga vega; ok æt­laðe15 síðarr, með erki-biskops fulltinge,
at kirkjan mynde fá sín réttinde. En þaðan sem hann vánaðe huggun
at fá, kómo haor­mungar tíðende, þvi at lítlo síðarr var Eysteinn
erki-biskop land-flæmðr firer kirkna-mál. Þóttozt aller her á lande
mega þar epter goera, sem menn gærðo firer í Norege.20

[[284: 20.]]

6. Þenna dag vígðe biskop kirkjo ok soeng messo, þó (at) þar yrðe
eige hans vile fram-gengr. Unðe hann lítt við þesse mála-lok; goerðo
ok aller aðrer at dæmom Ioans síðan, at enger vildo gefa kirkjor í
vald Þorláks biskops; ok því féll niðr sú kæra um hans daga.5

7. Marger hluter báro til á daogom Þorláks biskops, er mikellar
frá-sagnar ero verðer, þótt her sé til fárra innt; þvi at hann þolðe
hvers-kyns mæðo ok meinsemðer af ymislegom tilferlom, saker ranglætes
ok ó-hlýðne sínna under-manna; svá sem heyraz má í þeim at-burðom,
sem her fylgja:--10



3. 1. Maðr sá er Haogne hét bió á Bæ í Borgar-firðe; hann var Þormóðar
son, prestr at vígslo ok miok auðegr, en ætt-smár. Kona hans hét
Geirlaug, ok var Árna dótter. Ey­jolfr Stafhyltingr átte dóttor
þeirra; hann var auð-maðr mikell: Onnor dótter Haogna var Snælaug;
hón sat heima ó-gefen. Hón15 fædde barn þat er kennt var verk-manne
faoðor hennar, er Gunnarr hét, ok var kallaðr Nauta-tík. Ecki hataðe
Haogne hána firer þat; ok ecke hélt hann nú dóttor sínne minnr á loft,
an áðr þetta gerðez.

2. Svá bar til, at Snælaug var vistom í Saurbæ á Hvalfiarðar-straond;20
þar lagðe þocka á hána Þórðr prestr, son Baoðvars í Gaorðom á
Akra-nese; hónom rann hugr til kononnor; fóro þeir feðgar í Bæ, ok
báðo Haogna gifta Þórðe konona; varð því keypt; fær [[285: 20.]] Þórðr
Snælaugar; unnozt þau miket, ok átto son saman. Sá maðr er Hreinn
hét, sonr Hermundar er þá bió á Gils-backa, hafðe veret á fóstre með
Haogna þann tíma er Snælaug átte laun-barnet. Hann hafðe útan faret;
ok fréttez andlát hans af Norege. Ok er þat kom firer þau Haogna ok
Snælaugu, sagðe hón hann veret hafa5 faoðor at Guðrúno dóttor sínne,
en þorat eige upp at kveða, sakar ríkess Hermundar faoðor hans. Ok
er þetta varð al-kunnegt, prófaz þeir fiór-menningar Þórðr ok Hreinn.

3. Ok er Þorlákr biskop varð þessa víss, firerbauð hann þeim Þórðe ok
Snælaugo samvister. En með þvi at þau unnoz miket,10 gáfo þau lítenn
gaum at hvat hann sagðe. Efter þat forboðaðe hann þau, ok bann-sette
þar næst. Biskop geck ok sialfr á Alþinge til Laogbergs, ok lýste því,
at hann sagðe í sundr þeim hiúskap er veret hafðe í millom þeirra,
ok sagðe laun-geten baorn þeirra, sem geten vóro upp frá því sem mein
vóro vitoð. Þetta líkaðe þeim15 Þórðe ok Haogna ílla, svá at þeir
laogðo fullan fiándskap til biskops móte hans heilræðom ok um-vandan;
drógo þeir menn til með ser at veita hónom mótgang.

4. Haogne hafðe faret til Noregs efter viðar-farme, ok láteð gera
kirkjo í Bæ: þar hafðe eige meira prest-kaup goldez áðr en tolf20
aurar. Haogne miste embættes síns, saker svika þeirra, er hann
hafðe saman dreget ó-leyft hióna-lag, ok hélt með máge sínom ok
dóttor móte biskope um saogð mál. Þorlákr biskop talaðe oft til, at
[[285: 20.]] hann vilde vígja kirkjo í Bæ. En Haogne visse, at biskop
kallaðez eiga forráð ok vald á aollom kirkjo-fiám; ok því firer-tók
hann at sú kirkja mynde nockorn tíma vígð vera, meðan hann mætte um
mæla, til þess at biskop ætte þar vald ifer; ok sagðe at þat skylde
5 skraut-legast hrossa-hús á Íslande, ef hann réðe þesso eige. En
biskop neitaðe þessom koste, ok létte eige af réttre um-vandan,
sýnande sik eige vera reyr-vaond linleiks, heldr oeruggan fylgjara
sannleiks. Eige óttaðez hann ógner þeirra prestanna eðr hótan.



4. 1. Fyrr-nefndr Eyjolfr fell allr móte biskope saker mága sínna, ok
svá firer þat, at hann hafðe hann í10 stór-mælom firer kvenna-mál. Sú
var ok ein saok þeirra í millom, at biskope þótte Eyjolfr ranglega
halda staðenn í Stafa-holte, þó at héraðs-menn hefðe hann þar niðr
settan útan biskops ráð; þar sem Steine prestr hafðe eige staðenn
gefet í erfðer, útan skilet 15 tvá kvenn-ómaga ór sínne ætt ævinlega á
staðenn. Nú af því, at biskop linaðezt ecki, geck Þórðr ok Snælaug til
sætta við hann at kalla, ok tóko lausner ok skrifter.  Fiár-skipte ok
skilnaðr var á þann veg, at Þórðr skilde vera í Gaorðom, ok hafa sítt
fé, en Snælaug í Bæ með sínom peningom. Endezt þat eige betr en svá
20 af Þórðe, at þau vóro laongom á-samt, ok átto þriá sono: Þórleif,
Márkús, ok Baoðvar; vóro þau stundom í sætt, en stundom í forboðan
af biskope.

[[286: 20.]]

2. Kirkjo-mál fór ecki til vegar. En eitt sinn, ór biskop reið um
herað, sat Eyjolfr firer hónom við Gríms-á, ok tók hest-tauma hans,
ok lét hann eige framm fara. Biskop vilde ecki með hann tala, þvi
at hann var í stór-mælom. Eyjolfr mælte þá: 'Þat er mítt erende,
at ek vil at þú fester mer sialf-dæme firer klerka þína tvá, þá er5
mágar míner, Bæjar-menn, eigo legordz saker á at kæra um bænda dætr
ser skildar; en ek hefer nú teket þesse mál.' Biskop svarar [1768]
engo. Eyjolfr reiddez þá ok mælte: 'Eige munu þer ó-skemðer undan
komazt, nema þú fester sialf-dæmet.' Sá maðr er Þórleifr hét, ok
kallaðr Beiskalde--hann bió í Hitárdal--var í faor með biskope.10
Hann sá, at til ú-hæfo horfðe; ok því reið hann framm at Eyjolfe
ok mælte: 'Viltú at ek handsala þer sialf-dæmet, ok láter þú biskop
fara friálsan?' Eyjolfr mælte: 'Eige gerer biskop þat er þú gerer;
á-ek engar saker við þik.' Þórleifr mælte: 'Maorgom maonnom muno tæk
þickja handsaol mín; ok ef þú tekr þau eige,15 þá muno ver iafn-snimma
skemder vera.' Eyjolfr tók þá þenna kost, ok doemðe þegar fimm hundroð
mó-rendrar vaoro á hvárn kler­kenn; ok skildozt at því. En upp frá
þesso geck Eyjolfr hvártki (til) tírs né tíma; fórozt penningarner,
en hann ok hús-frú hans lifðo eige lenge. Are, son hans, var lostenn
lík-þrá, ok Ólof dótter20 hans varð half-fífla; ok selðe hann Snorra
Sturlo syne, meðr ráðe Snælaugar í Bæ, staðar-forráð; en hann skilde
gifta hána ok fá [[286: 21.]] henne penninga. En gifting sú kom ecki
framm, ok átte hon baorn með strákom.

3. Einn tíma giste heilagr Þorlákr biskop í Reykjaholte at Magnusar
prestz: hann reið við flock manna suðr under Múla-fell með herra
biskope; ok at skilnaðe mælte hann: 'Veit-ek at þenna5 dag munoð-ér
liðs þurfa, ok því hafða-ek marga menn meðr mer; vil-ek fylgja yðr
til þess at ek veit yðr hætto-laust vera.' Biskop mælte: 'Hvaðan
mun þat at koma?' Magnus svaraðe: 'Heyrt hefer-ek at Haogna í Bæ
líkar ílla, þat er ér hafet mága hans í stór-mælom, Þórð ok Eyjolf;
en vilet eige vígja kirkjo hans, nema þér10 ráðet máldaogom; ok
þicker hónom brotenn lannz-réttr á sér: því trúer-ek, at hann ætlar
at þer skilet í Bæ gista í kveld, en eige í Saur-bæ, sem þer hafet
ætlað.' Biskop svaraðe: 'Haf þaock firer fylgð þína ok trúleika;
en þú skalt heim ríða, ok fara vel; under Guðe er vár ferð; ecke
mein muno Bæjar-menn mer gera.' Magnus15 svarar: 'Svá skal vera sem
þer vilet; en segja vilda-ek yðr hvat varaz var, ok láta til reiðo
mítt faoro-neyte.' Biskop svarar: 'Far vel, vinrer, Guð mon gæta
vár.' Riðo Reykhyltingar þá heim; en biskop fór framm til Gríms-ár;
en under hennar sand-baockom, við vað þat er Steins-vað er kallat,
sáto þeir Haogne ok mágar hans20 með marga menn. En þegar biskop ok
hans menn kómo í lægðena, riðo Haogna menn framm firer þá, ok baonnoðo
þeim gaotona. Biskop spurðe hví þeir gerðe svá. Haogne prestr reið
[[287: 21.]] þá framm ok mælte: 'Nú ætla-ek at þú skiler vígja kirkjo
í Bæ, ok snúa heim með mer.' Biskop svaraðe: 'Í Saurbæ hefer ek ætlað
mína ferð; en eige í Bæ.' Haogne mælte: 'Ek verð nú at ráða, ok enge
er annarr kostr.' Þorlákr biskop vilde eige þess bíða, at hann være
hand-tekenn, heldr fór hann með þessom óvinar-flocke,5 ok var í Bæ þá
nótt: en hverge sveigðez hugr hans firer þeirra kúgan, heldr fór hann í
braut í friðe, at vild sínna ó-vina, síðan þeir sá hann búenn at þola
aoll vandræðe heldr en sveigja rétt­enden meðr nockors-konar ó-einorð
eða hug-leyse. Fundoz þá hans mót-staoðo-menn at sínom ó-iafnaðe, er
þeir sá hans stað­feste:10 vóro þá fengner til hiner vitrosto menn til
meðal-gaongo um heiman-fylgjo kirkjonnar ok tíða-offr prestz. Sá herra
biskop þat, at þá var meira vert, at marger menn ok mikels-verðer,
þeir sem áðr vóro mót-staoðo-menn kirkjonnar, yrðe hennar viner, þó
at Haogne hefðe sína beizslo um þat, at kirkja ætte heldr út-laond
en15 heima-land, þar sem hón feck þó fulla pen(nin)ga [1769] at
fiár-tale. Kómo nú hvárer-tveggio, Eyjolfr ok Haogne, Þórðr ok Snælaug,
ok tóko laustn. Geck Eyjolfr þá ór kvenna-vandræðe því er hann hafðe
áðr í leget. Efter þat fór biskop aftr í Bæ, ok þá þar fagra veizlo;
var þar miket fiolmenne ok veitt af kappe. Biskop vígðe20 þar kirkjo
með þeim máldaga sem þeir Haogne ok biskop urðo á sátter. Affara-dag
veizlonnar gaf Haogne biskope sæmelegar giafer, ok skilðoz þá með
vinátto. Þaðan fór Þorlákr biskop í Stafholt; [[288: 22.]] gaf Eyjolfr
biskope þá þat fé, sem Þórleifr hafðe handfest firer hann. Fór herra
biskop heim þat haust. Sættez herra biskop við þessa menn til þess
at mínka vandræðe; en hváreger laogðo fulla alvaoro til annarra.

4. Marger menn veitto Þorláke biskope mikenn mótgang, þó at
5 sumer yrðe at því berare en sumer; þvi at þeir virðo hónom til
harðleiks ok miskunar-leyses við folket, er hann vandaðe um ó-siðo
ok bera glæpe vándra manna, ok þroengðe þeim með valde ok stríðo
heilagrar kirkjo, sem eige vildo leið-réttaz við hans hialp­samlegar
á-minningar.                  10



5. 1. Sveinn hét maðr [1770], son Hvammz-Sturlo, ó-eirenn ok
ó-ráðvandr. Þesse maðr lagðe í reckio hiá ser ná-frænd-kono
hús-frú sínnar: hann bió í Nyrðra-Reykjar-firðe á Straondom í
Vestfirðinga-fiórðunge. Sælom Þorláke biskope mis­líkaðe miok þetta
hans til-ferle, ok veitte um-vandan, fyrst með                    15
fortaolom ok á-minningom, en síðan með forboðom ok banne; þvi at
Sveinn harðnaðe á því meirr í sínne íllzko, sem biskop hann oftarr
á-minte at betra sítt ráð.

2. Ok þann tíma er heilagr Þorlákr biskop fór um þenna fiórðung, aflaðe
þesse same Sveinn ser sveitar til þess at sitja firer           20
biskope. Þeir fóro heiman, ok á þá leið, sem þeir hugðo biskop mundo
ríða. Ok er þeir kómo stund [1771] frá bænom, gerðe at þeim [[289:
23.]] þoko, svá at þeir sá eige vegenn. En er þeir haofðo lenge faret
á-framm, laogðoz þeir niðr þar sem þeir vóro komner, saker myrkrs;
en biskop ok hans menn riðo í biaorto veðre. En þann tíma sem marger
menn kómo móte biskope, svá at Sveinn hafðe ecke liðs við þeim, létte
af myrkvanom, ok sá þeir nú, at þeir haofðo villt5 faret; ok svá þat,
at biskop var um riðenn, svá at þeir átto ecki vald á hónom. Kende
hverr aoðrom þat er þeir haofðo villzt; ok af þesso sundr-þycke dró
þeim svá mikla ú-hamingio til handa, at þeir unnoz á, ok Sveinn drap
þann mann er Orn hét, við þá laug sem þar er í firðenom. Féck Sveinn
ok hans faoro-nautar bæðe10 skióta hegnd ok maklega firer þat, er hann
vilde nauðung gera Guðs manne. En biskop ok hans menn fóro friálslega
efter sínom vilja.



6. 1. Herra Þorlákr biskop kærðe marga hlute á Ioan Loftz son í Odda,
bæðe um hór-dóma ok rangan15 fiár-afla; ok einkanlega um þat, at hann
hélt Ragneiðe, systor hans, heima hiá ser meðr fullo þráe ok ó-hlýðne,
at lifande hús-frú sínne. En þó at Ioan svaraðe at nockoro hófe um
aðrar á-kærslor biskops, þá vilde hann þó til engrar sættar ganga
at skilja við Ragneiðe. Kom svá um síðer at biskop forboðaðe. Ioan
angraðe20 miok at þola stríðo af biskope, saker metnaðar; ok þess
annars, er marger átto íllan hlut at þeirra málom, ok einkanlega
Þórsteinn son hans, er bió í Gunnars-holte: hann eggjaðe faoðor sínn
meðr ú-heyrelegre heimsko í haofot biskope, en Ioan ætlaðe enn sem
[[289: 23.]] fyrr meðr kúgan biskop kloekkvan at goera, heldr en vápn
á hann at bera.

2. Ok einn tíma þá er Þorlákr biskop fór í sýslo sína, ok hann átte
vegenn í gegnom bæenn í Odda, hugðe Ioan at handtaka biskop ok kúga,
sem hann goerðe við marga. Hann sette menn5 tveim-megen geila þeirra,
sem fyr austan bæenn ero, ok hugðo biskop þar mundo um fara; þvi at
hann reið ór Eyjom neðan ok upp á Rangár-vaollo. Ok er þeir kómo ifer
eystre Rang-á, sýndez þeim í Odda, sem þycka þoko legðe ór hafe upp,
svá at nær sá ecki: endez hón þar til at biskop ok hans menn vóro ór
aug-sýn.10 En þeir sem í forsáte vóro, hugðo at biskop mynde aðra leið
faret hafa. Fylgðar-menn biskops sá gerla menn sitja tveim-megin geila;
en þvi at þeir visso eige hverjo þat gegnðe, fóro þeir ó-hrædder,
þvi at hiner buðo þeim engan ótta. Ok er Ioan visse þessa sína ætlan
brostna, reið hann til búa sínna í svig við biskop15 með saomo ætlan,
ok nockorer menn með hónom. Hann vand­ræddez þó um firer vinom
sínom, hverso hann skilde með haondom hafa þau harðinde, sem hann
þóttez af biskope fá. Þórsteinn, son hans, var þá hiá hónom ok mælte:
'Ek mun leysa þenna vanda, faðer, ok ráða af biskop þenna, er ó-dæme
gerer á maonnom.' Ioan20 svaraðe: 'Fara máttú til mótz við biskop,
ef þer líkar; en annarrar ú-gifto mun þer auðet verða, en vinna ifer
Þorlák um nockorn hlut; oengom mun þat ætlað vera útan mer einom,
ef ek [[290: 23.]] vil mín til liá.' Þórsteinn kvazt ecki því trúa;
ok fór með nockora menn; ok kómo þeir á Vaollo þá er biskop var ifer
borðom. Ok er þeir sá menn út ganga, spurðo þeir hvar biskop være;
þeim var [1772] sagt, at hann være ifer borðe. Þórsteinn tók þá at
heitaz miok við biskop, ef hann genge út. Þeir sem til dura haofðo
genget,5 kómo inn. Þeir vóro spurðer hverer menn være komner. Þeir
saogðo at komenn være Þórsteinn Ioans son ok menn með hónom miok
vápnaðer, ok at Þórsteinn heitaðez miok við hann, ef hann genge
út. Saogð haofðo biskope veret orð hans fyrre, ok svaor faoðor
hans, svá ok aoll til-ætlan Ioans. Heima-menn laotto biskop10 út at
ganga, en hann, oeruggr ok ó-skelfðr móte ótta vándra manna, svarar,
'Ganga mun-ek til kirkio sem ek em vanr, ecki mun þesse maðr goera
mer til meins.' Heima-menn mælto þá: 'Herra, siteð inne, ok syngeð
á psaltara yðarn, ok hætteð yðr ecki under vápn heljar-mannzens þess
er einskis svífzt.' Biskop svarar: 'Fara15 mun-ek sem ek hefe ætlat,
en ef þesse maðr gerer mer nockot, ... [1773] má vera at ek þurfa þá
eige meira munar.' Efter þat geck biskop út; ok er Þórsteinn leit hann,
þá dvalðe hann eige upp at reiða oexena. En þat var [1774] eige unnt
at sloema [1775] henne; hann mátte henne eigi framm hoeggva, ætlande
þat at Guðs kraftr hefðe hann tálmat.20 Í því leit biskop við hónom,
ok mælte ecki, ok geck til kirkjo sem hann hafðe ætlat. Þórsteinn fór
at finna faoðor sínn, ok sagðe [[290: 24.]] hónom sína faor slíka sem
veret hafðe. Ioan mælte: 'Ecki geck þetta fiarre mínne ætlan.' Hann
var þá spurðr, hví hann hió eige framm oexenne. Hann sagðe stirðna
handleggena frá því er biskop leit til hans, ok til þess er hann kom
í kirkjona, svá (at) hann mátti eige framm reiða oexena.5

3. Ioan Loftz son leggr þá eige niðr upp tekenn ó-þocka, heldr kallar
hann menn at ser, ok ætlar þann dag sem biskop ríðr frá Fellz-múla
til Leiro-backa, at sitja firer hónom þar sem nú heiter Vatz-hlíð,
ok setr menn hváro-megin vatz-vegarens hiá garðenom. Biskop hafðe af
Vaollom riðet til Fellz-múla. Kom þesse til-ætlan10 Ioans firer biskop
ok hans menn; ok báðo menn hann ríða aðra leið, at eige bære funde
þeirra saman. En hann sialfr var oeruggr um sik, ok gerðe aðra út af
ser oerugga; ok hvárke óttaðez hann mann-fiolða né vápna-búnað, ok
reið ó-skialfande til firer-búenna firer-sátra. En Allz-valldande Guð
leidde enn sem fyrr þoko ifer15 þann veg, sem hann fór ok hans menn;
þó svá at þeir fáto [1776] vel veg sínn, siánde sína umsátar-menn;
en þeir Ioan ok hans menn sá eige biskop, né hans menn, ok eige veg
sínn, fyrr en biskop ok hans menn vóro komner ór augsýn. Reið [1777]
biskop þann dag, sem hann hafðe ætlat, ok var um nóttena í Leiro-backa
[1778] í góðom20 fagnaðe.

4. Úm morgonenn veit Ioan, at biskop mune ríða til Ytra-Skarðz;
[[291: 24.]] ætlar hann þá enn firer hónom at sitja, eige á veg,
heldr við bæenn á Skarðe. Skipar nú svá til, at frá Baðz-garðe upp
frá Klofa skal geilar goera af maonnom heim at kirkjo-garðz-hliðe:
skal Ioan þar í standa; en biskop skal eige til bæjar komaz, útan
hann ríðe þessar geilar; ok eige í kirkjo-garðenn nema þar sem5 Ioan
er firer. Ok er morgin kemr, þá ferr þesse ætlan framm. En áðr en
biskop ríðr af Leiro-backa, þá verðr hann víss þessarar til-tekjo
Ioans. Ok er þeir komo framm at Bað-garðe [1779], siá menn biskops
tvennar skipaner marg-mennes þess er þeim er ætlað í mille at ríða;
ok nema staðar. Biskop kom skiótt efter, ok bað10 þá ecki óttaz, 'þvi
at til mín, en eige til yðar, er siá leikr goerr.' Hann ríðr fyrstr
framm í kvína, ok næst hónom Ormr prestr capalín hans, ok þar efter
hverr at aoðrom, til þess er biskop kom at kirkjo-garðz-hliðe, þar sem
Ioan var firer, ok steig af bake. Eige var kostr í hliðet at ganga,
þvi at þat var fullt af maonnom:15 eige var ok kostr í braut at snúa,
þvi at fiolmenne þroengðe at aollom-megen. Ecki varð af kveðjom. Biskop
mælte: 'Hvárt hyggr þú, Ioan, at banna mer kirkjo?' Ioan svarar: 'Þat
mun under yðr vera.' Biskop mælte: 'Svá sýnez mer nú, sem þú muner ráða
vilja at sinne; en forvitnar mik hví þú goerer þetta.'20 Ioan svarar:
'Þér hafet bannat mer kirkjo langan tíma, ok heiteð at bann-færa mik;
firer því vilda-ek at svá bære ockra funde [[292: 24.]] saman, at
ek ætta meira under mer en yðr.' Biskop mælte: 'Satt er þat, at ek
hefe lýst forboðom ifer þer firer sannar saker; en frestað firer því
bannz áfelle, at ek vánaða, at þú munder vizko til hafa at ganga ór
þíno vandræðe; en ef þú gerer þat eige, máttú til víst [1780] vita,
at ek mun eige fresta at bann-setja þik; ok munde5 betr at fyrr hefðe
veret.' 'Veit-ek,' sagðe Ioan, 'at bann þítt er rétt, ok saoken
gnóg; mun-ek þola þín um-mæle með því móte, at fara í Þórs-maork,
eðr í einhvern þann stað, er eige sekezf alþýða af sam-neyte við mik;
ok vera þar hiá kono þeirre sem ér vandlæteð um, þann tíma sem mer
líkar; ok ecki mun bann yðvart10 skilja mik frá vandræðom mínom,
né nockors mannz nauðung, til þess er Guð andar því í brióst mer,
at skiljaz viljande við þau. En hygget svá yðvart efne, at ek ætla
svá til at haga, at þer veiteð eige fleirom maonnom þetta embætte en
mer.' Biskop varð við þesse  orð hlióðr um stunder saker. En at lyktom
mælte hann: 'Ek em15 búenn firer þetta mál, at þola allt þat sem mer
má í koma: goer hvat er þú vilt, þvi at ek em búenn at láta bannet
eige undan líða, saker hugleyses firer heitan þína.' Ioan svarar:
'Ef þú ætlar svá at goera sem þú talar, mun-ek eige hætta til fleire
funda ockarra.' En þó at Ioan mælte slíkt, brá biskop ser með engo
móte við: en20 Ormr prestr, sá er næstr hónom stóð, sá at Ioan munde
eige mýkja reiðe sína; ok þeir sem áðr haofðo veret íllz eggjande,
þeir mundo [[292: 24.]] búner til at full-gera þat sem heiteð var;
hlióp hann framm firer biskop, ok mælte: 'Ek sære yðr, mínn herra,
firer nafn várs herra Iesu Christi, at eige steypeð ér banne ifer Ioan
ok systor yðra at þesso sinne, heldr bíðe ér ef at sú stund mætte
koma, er Ioan dró í ván, at hann mynde skilja sik sialfr frá henne,
ok take af yðr5 um-bót. Hygget at, herra, ef yðr þicker mikel niðran
ger kirkjonne at þesse bið-stund [1781], at meire niðran er henne,
at missa yckar beggja á einom dege; þvi at Ioan mun oeruggr at láta
þat statt, sem hann heitr góðo. Líteð á, þó at ér legget líkama yðarn
í hætto firer Guðs saker, at eige bætez enn léttare glæprenn, þó at
enn þyngre10 fare epter; ok betra er góðs at bíða með þolin-mæðe, en
auka vandræðe.' Biskop leit í fyrsto ú-blíðlega til hans; en af þvi
at marger studdo hans erende, mælte hann: 'Enn er sem fyrr, at þú,
Ioan, ætlar at ráða, þótt þú viler verr; en ef ek vissa at dvaolen
kæme til góðs, mynda-ek á hána hætta.' Aller þeir sem við vóro15
urðo því fegner, at hann sagðe ván, at hann mynde fresta banneno,
ok forðaðez biskop svá lífs-háska. Efter þat var Ioan at spurðr nær
um-bóten [1782] skilde framm koma, sú er hann hefðe í ván dreget,
ef biskop frestaðe banneno. Ioan seger: 'Hlíta [1783] hlýtr biskop
bið-stundenne, ef atgoerða-laust skal vera, en ek mun ráða verða
fram-kvæmðenne.'20 At lyktom verðr sá ender á þessom funde, at biskop
hét at auka eige stríðo við Ioan um stundar saker; en Ioan lét biskop
ná kirkjo, ok reið í brott.

[[293: 25.]]

5. Efter þat liðo fáer mánoðer, áðr Ioan sagðe Ragneiðe ser afhenda;
ok tóko þau lausn ok skrift af biskope. En nockoro síðarr var Ragneiðr
gift Aust-manne þeim sem Arnþórr hét; ok kom frá þeim mart manna. En
biskop skilðe með þeim Ioane alla stund lífs síns, at þau skilde enga
funde eiga né viðr-tal, nema5 firer vitnom ok í opinberom staoðom. Varð
aldrege aoðro-víse en ú-blítt með þeim biskope ok Ioane meðan þeir
lifðo báðer. En Þórsteinn, son Ioans, en vega vilde Þorlák biskop,
sem fyrr seger, varð enn meste ú-gifto-maðr, svá at faðer hans ok
bræðr haofðo þar af langa skap-raun.10

6. Ioan Loftz son lét nockoro síðarr en þesser atburðer gerðoz,
smíða kirkjo ok klaustr-hús firer norðan læk at Keldom, ok ætlaðe
sialfr í at ganga: en enger urðo menn til ráðner. En þann tíma er
Þorlákr biskop heyrðe pata á þesso, spurðe hann, svá sem ó-vitande,
hvárt Ioan ætlaðe claustr at reisa at Keldom. Hónom15 vas sagt at þat
være satt. Hann spurðe enn: 'Hverjom ætlar hann helgom manne at gefa
claustret?' Þeir sem hiá hónom vóro, saogðo, at hann ætlaðe at gefa
claustret Iohanne Baptista. Biskop mælte þá: 'Þat ero mikel undr,
ef hann vill þiggja þat sem hefer þar saman boret, svá sem hann
hefer til aflat.' Urðo þesse orð20 eige at lok-leyso; þvi at þá er
Ioan kom til Keldna, tók hann bráð­lega sótt; ok er at hónom tók at
draga, lét hann leiða sik út í dyrr. Ok er hann sá til kirkjonnar,
mælte hann: 'Þar stendr þú, kirkja mín, þú harmar mik, en ek harma
þik.' Þóttez hann þá siá, at [[293: 25.]] ó-vís var upp-reist hennar,
ef hann kallaðe frá. Efter dauða hans lét Sæmundr, sonr hans, um sína
daga bæta fyrnd kirkjonnar ok húsanna. En at hónom liðnom skifto syner
hans kirkjonne ok húsonom ofan-teknom, sem sínom faoðor-arfe. Ok kómo
þá framm fyr-greind orð ens heilaga Þorláks biskops.5







3. It is also to be particularly said that lord Eystan the archbishop
made known to him his message with letters to Iceland, that all
church lands that were of old custom held by laymen should now all
be under the power of the bishop, according to the directions, as
he said, which the rules of the apostles and the ordinances of the
holy fathers bore witness to. Moreover, with regard to this message
which he thus went into, he gave him his letters patent to follow
up the rights of the Church over all the bishopric of Scal-holt,
which thing the newly-hallowed bishop the holy Thor-lac took up and
discussed and brought over and set forth as shall be later declared
particularly in this story.


1. 1. When the holy bishop Thor-lac had sat one winter in his
see [1179], he started on his visitation the next summer to the
East-friths, and when he was come to the south over Loon-peak-sand he
took guest-quarters at Swine-fell. Sig-urd, Orm's son, was dwelling
there at that time, a man of mark, of worldly pride, wealthy, and
of high kindred. The lord bishop was welcomed there as was meet. But
because the franklin wished to have a church consecrated there, the
bishop called him to talk with him on the morrow after, and set forth
the message of archbishop Ey-stan, wherein he had bidden him to gather
into his hands all the churches and all the property of the churches
within his bishopric. Sig-urd would not hear of this, and said that
he would not consent to give up what he had freely held aforetime
under the law of the land and of ancient use. The bishop said, that
the ordinance of the apostles themselves gave him power over all that
belonged to God without any distinction. 'The holy fathers of the
Church, and the popes the successors of the apostles, have bidden
and ordained the same throughout all Christendom in the canon law:
and now the pope hath also bidden archbishop Ey-stan to carry out the
same rule in Norway, and it hath been accepted there. Wherefore it
is neither lawful nor is it to be borne that this poor country should
not stand under the same law as holdeth good there.' Sig-urd answers
that 'North-men or aliens cannot by their consent take our rights
from us.' Then the bishop answered, 'The provision that uninformed
men have established here, in reserving to themselves the power over
those things that they had aforetime given to God, is of no force
by virtue of the laws themselves, and ought not to be held good, and
wheresoever this case is brought to law before the bishops such [as
have done this] are not in the number of them that have a good hope of
salvation, since they stand fast in their hardness of heart; and all
they that do stubbornly withhold tithes or that which appertaineth
to the saints, ought to be excommunicated after lawful admonitions,
if they will not be reconciled and desist from their wrong-doings.'

Now the day was wearing on, so that the franklin could see that the
consecration of the church could not take place except he gave up his
case, wherefore he turned to the right way and gave up the charter
of endowment of the church, and the church itself into the hands of
the bishop. Then the bishop consecrated the church and sang mass. And
after the mass he gave the church-stead to Sig-urd in fee for a term,
and Sig-urd consented to hold it of him.

2. Then the bishop went thence to Red-beck, where Orm the Old dwelt,
and there he put forth the same claim as at Swine-fell. And it went
much the same way by Orm giving up the dominion of the church to the
bishop and the bishop giving it to him in fee, and they parted friends.

3. Thence bishop Thor-lac went to the East-friths with the same intent,
and most of them that held church lands gave him the same answer.
And albeit many were slow to consent to give up their own heritage,
yet it all came to this, that bishop Thor-lac got the dominion over
all the church lands east of Heor-laf's head, save on Thwart-water
and Hall-orms-stead; and so it hath been ever since.



2. 1. At that time John Loft's son ruled in Ord. Now he was the
greatest chief in Iceland; he was a gode-hood's man or gode; he
was a man very wise in all clerkly skill, which he had gotten from
his forbears. He was a deacon hallowed, a great chaunter in Holy
Church. Moreover he ever set his heart greatly on this, that the
churches that he had in his dominion should be the best fitted up in
every way. He was a man full of well-nigh every kind of accomplishments
that were fashionable by men in those days. He was a man of so great
pride, and one that stood so by his rights that scarce any other man of
his day did so more, for he would never give way to anybody or withdraw
from any matter that he once took up. He had a wife whose name was
Hall-dora, and she was the daughter of Brand; their son was Sæ-mund.

2. John was greatly given up to the love of women, insomuch that he
had many other sons by sundry women--Thor-stan and Hall-beorn, and
Sig-urd and Einar. Moreover, Paul that was afterwards bishop, and
Orm that afterwards dwelt at Broad-bowster were the sons of him and
of Rag-neid Thor-kal's daughter, the sister to bishop Thor-lac. John
and she had loved each other from their youth up. Nevertheless she
had borne children to other men. They were fully grown, Paul and Orm,
the sons of John and Rag-neid, by the time that bishop Thor-lac came
to Iceland in the office of bishop. Paul dwelt at Utter-Scard and Orm
at Broad-bowster. John was used to keep Rag-neid at home with him at
Ord for long together.

3. In those days John had come to own Head-brink-land, which was
thought to be one of the very best of estates till Head-river spoiled
it. A south-west storm had broken down two churches there, and John
had had one new church built in their stead, right fairly wrought, and
the holy bishop Thor-lac was to take up his guest-quarters there that
same harvest when he came from the East-friths, as was said before. It
was intended that he should consecrate the church there. There was
a seemly feast made there for him, and at the day that was set the
bishop came thither with his following. John was there to meet him
and many other men of mark.

4. In the morning the bishop made ready to consecrate the church,
and John and they that were of one mind with him went to the bishop,
and they talked over the terms of the charter of the church [as was
the use]. The lord bishop, being bound to follow up the rights of the
Church, asked whether John had heard the archbishop's message with
regard to the possessions of the Church. John answered, 'I am willing
to hear the archbishop's message, but I am steadfastly minded to pay
no heed to it at all, for I do not think that he wills or knows better
than my forbears, Sæ-mund the historian and his sons. Nor am I minded
to make of no account the doings of our bishops here in this country,
in that they paid heed to the law of the land, that laymen should have
power over the churches that their forbears gave to God, reserving to
themselves and their issue the right over them.' The bishop answered
with the same reasons as were read above, and with many more, saying,
'Thou knowest this well, John, if thou wilt stand by the right, that
the bishop hath right over the church lands and tithes, according
to the ordinances of the apostles and the other holy fathers. And
inasmuch as laymen cannot have any right over these things, therefore
they can never get freehold of these things by the title of ancient
use. I trust that the rulers of the churches that have been before us,
will be greatly excused by reason of its never having been commanded
them by their superiors to call the churches and tithes into their own
hand.... Wherefore they are to be excommunicated that hold stubbornly
to the tithes or God's lands against the will and consent of the
bishops.' John answered, 'Ye may call him excommunicate whom ye will,
but I will never consent to give up into your hands what is mine,
be it small church or great, of those which I have rights over.'

5. Moreover there was another point at issue between them arising
out of the outburst of Head-river, inasmuch as it had swept away
many homesteads that belonged to that estate, and those too upon
which the churches stood, whereby the tithe was lessened, and there
were fewer houses for outlying services. Wherefore John wished that
there should be no more than one priest and one deacon for the [new]
church, but before there had been two priests and two deacons. The
lord bishop allowed himself to be persuaded thereto for this same
reason [of the loss of land, etc.]. But on the former point each man
held to his claim, and the day was wearing far on. But they who gave
themselves out as friends of both prayed the bishop to abate somewhat
of his claim, and all the gathering drew that way, following the
old evil ways. But when bishop Thor-lac saw this, that he could not
for the time establish his claim, these words broke from his mouth,
'Though it is not to be borne, if the matter come before lawful judges,
that thou should draw the rights of the Church to thyself and from the
bishops, according to the custom of the country, yet it is much less
to be borne that the bishops should not take from thee thy harlots
whom thou keepest clean against all the custom of the country. Yet
it may be that thou shalt have thy way in the greater matter, if thou
have thy way in the lesser, nevertheless thou art in the wrong way.'

Men believe that bishop Thor-lac spake these words because he found
that the multitude followed John with regard to the matter of the
Church, and that he gave way for the time because he perceived
that he would get no profit thereof, even if he stood to his case,
but rather great damage in many ways; moreover it was his hope,
by the archbishop's help, that the Church should afterwards get her
rights. But from the place whence he looked for comfort to come there
came grievous tidings, for a little later archbishop Ey-stan was driven
out of his country for matters of church right. And all men here in
our country thought that they could do according as was done in Norway.

6. That day the bishop consecrated the church and sang mass, though
he gat no furtherance in what he wished. He was ill pleased with the
issue of the case, for all the others did afterwards according to the
example of John, and none of them would give his church right up to
bishop Thor-lac, whereby this whole claim fell to the ground as long
as he lived.

7. Many things happened in the days of bishop Thor-lac that are worthy
of high report, albeit but few are touched on here, for he suffered
all manner of toil and afflictions from divers calamities by reason
of the wickedness and disobedience of them that were under him,
as may be heard from the incidents that here follow:--



3. 1. There was a man named Hogne that dwelt at By in Burg-frith. He
was the son of Thor-mod, a man hallowed priest and very wealthy, but
of low birth. His wife's name was Gar-laug, and she was the daughter
of Arne. Ey-wolf the Staf-holt-man had their daughter to wife. He
was a very rich man. A second daughter of Hogne was Snæ-laug. She
abode at home unwedded. She gave birth to a child that was put down
to a workman of her father's, whose name was Gunnar, and was called
'Neat-tyke.' Hogne was just as well pleased with his daughter for all
this, and did not hold up his daughter a whit less than he had before.

2. Now it came about that Snæ-laug was staying at Sowerby in
Whale-frith-strand. There Thord the priest, the son of Bead-war o'
Garth in Acre-ness, was well pleased with her, and his heart was
moved towards the woman. So he and his father went to By, and asked
Hogne to give her to Thord to wife. The bargain was struck. Thord
took Snæ-laug to wife. They loved each other dearly, and had a son
together. There was a man named Hran, the son of Her-mund, who was
then dwelling at Gils-bank. He had been in fosterage with Hogne at
the time when Snæ-laug had a bastard child. He had gone abroad, and
the news of his death was now heard from Norway. And when Hogne and
Snæ-laug got the news, she said that he [Hran] had been the father
of her daughter Gud-run, but that she had not dared to acknowledge
it because of the power of Her-mund her father. And when this was
become known everywhere, Thord and Hran proved to be fourth cousins.

3. And when bishop Thor-lac was aware thereof, he forbad Thord and
Snæ-laug to live together. But inasmuch as they loved each other
dearly they gave little heed to what he said. After that he put
them under prohibition, and at last he excommunicated them. Moreover
the bishop himself went up to the Rock of Laws at the All-moot, and
proclaimed that he declared the marriage that had been between them
to be sundered, and declared their children that were born to them
after the lawful impediment was known to be bastards. Thord and Hogne
were very ill-pleased with this, so that they paid back full enmity
against the bishop in return for his wholesome exhortation and rebuke,
and they brought over men to them to set up strife against him.

4. Hogne had been out to Norway for a shipload of timber, and had had
a church built [therewith] at By. There had no more priest-hire been
paid before than twelve ounces. Hogne lost his cure because of his
betrayal of duty in that he had brought about this unlawful wedlock,
and for holding with his son-in-law and daughter against the bishop
in this case. Bishop Thor-lac often mooted this, that he was minded
to consecrate the church at By. But inasmuch as Hogne knew that
the bishop claimed to own right and power over all the church land,
therefore he refused outright to let the church be dedicated at all
as long as he had a voice in the matter, lest the bishop should ever
get the power over it, saying that that church should be the noblest
stable in Iceland if he was not to have his own way in the other
matter. But the bishop refused these terms and would not withhold
his righteous rebuke, showing himself thereby to be no reed-wand
of weakness, but a fearless follower of truth. Nor did he fear the
threats and hoots of these priests.



4. 1. The aforenamed Ey-jolf turned altogether against the bishop
because of his kin by marriage, and also because the bishop had a grave
charge against him for the matter of women. There was also a lawsuit
between them, because the bishop thought that Ey-jolf had wrongful
possession of the land at Staff-holt, so that the men of that hundred
established or set him down there without the ruling of the bishop,
although priest Stane had not given the estate as an inheritance, but
reserved maintenance for two helpless women of his family for ever. Now
because the bishop would not be softened, Thord and Snæ-laug went and
made peace with him, so to speak, and got quit-claims and writings
from him. The shares and parting between them was [settled] in this
way--that Thord should be at Garth and keep his own goods, but Snæ-laug
[was to be] at By with her pence. But Thord kept his engagement no
better than this, that he and she lived together for months at a time,
and had three sons--Thor-laf, Mark, and Bead-war. They were sometimes
reconciled with the bishop and sometimes under his prohibition.

2. The case of the church made no way, and once upon a time when the
bishop was riding over the country side, Ey-jolf lay in wait for him
at Grim's-river, and caught hold of the reins of his horse and would
not let him go on. The bishop would not speak to him because he was
under a grave charge. Then Ey-jolf said, 'This is my errand here,
that I will have thee lawfully make over to me or handsel me self-doom
or the right of settling the matter for thy two clerks against whom
my sons-in-law the Men o' By have actions of seduction to sue on
behalf of franklins' daughters of their kin, and now I have taken
up this case for them.' The bishop did not answer. Then Ey-jolf grew
very angry, and said, 'Ye shall not go away unhurt save ye handsel me
self-doom.' A certain man whose name was Thor-laf, and who was called
'Beiscalde,' that dwelt at Hot-river-dale, was in company with the
bishop. He saw that it looked as if things would go badly, and he rode
forth to Ey-jolf and said, 'Wilt thou have me handsel thee self-doom,
and do thou let the bishop go free?' Said Ey-jolf, 'Thy deed is not
the bishop's deed; I have no case against thee.' Said Thor-laf, 'Many
a man would be glad to have my handsel, and if thou wilt not take it,
then thou shalt not hurt the bishop before thou shalt hurt me' [i.e. 'I
will make the bishop's case mine']. Then Ey-jolf took the offer, and
straightway laid the damage at 500 morat-ware [dark undyed wadmal]
for each clerk, and with that they parted. But from this time forward
naught went well or prosperously with Ey-jolf. He lost his money, and
he and his goodwife did not live long. His son Are was stricken with
leprosy, and Olof his daughter became half-witted, and he gave over to
Snorre Sturlason his rectory with the consent of Snæ-laug o' By, but
in return Snorre was to give him in marriage and find her a dowry. But
the marriage never took place, and she had children by land-lopers.

3. Once upon a time the holy bishop Thor-lac was a guest at Reek-holt
with Magnus the priest. He rode with a company of men southward
under Mull-fell with the lord bishop, and at their parting he said,
'I know that this day ye will need help, wherefore I have brought
many men with me, and I will follow you until I know that ye are
out of jeopardy.' Said the bishop, 'Whence will it come?' Magnus
answered, 'I have heard that Hogne o' By is ill-pleased that ye have
grave charges against his sons-in-law, Thord and Ey-jolf, and that
ye will not consecrate his church except ye make your own terms in
the charter, and he believes that the law of the land is broken to
his hurt. Wherefore I believe that he means you to be a guest at By
to-night and not at Sower-by, as ye had meant.' The bishop answered,
'Have [my] thanks for thy following and faithfulness, but do thou
ride home, and farewell. Our way is in God's hands, and the Men o'
By will not do me any harm.' Magnus answered, 'It shall be as ye will,
but I wished to tell you what to be most ware of, and put my following
under your orders.' The bishop answers, 'Farewell, friend. God will
keep us.' Then the Reek-holt-men rode home, but the bishop went on
to Grim's-river; but under the sand-bank by that river over against
the ford that is called Stone's-wade, Hogne and his sons-in-law were
lying in wait, and many men with them. But as soon as the bishop and
his men came into the dip, Hogne's men rode out and stopped their
path. The bishop asked why they did so. Priest Hogne rode forth and
said, 'Now I mean that thou shouldst consecrate the church at By,
and turn hence with me.' The bishop answered, 'I had meant to go
to Sower-by, and not to By.' Said Hogne, 'I must have my way now,
and there is no second choice.' Bishop Thor-lac would not push it
so far as to be made prisoner, but rather went with the company of
his enemies and stayed that night at By, but his heart never bent
at their threat, but he went away in peace with the free consent of
his enemies, inasmuch as they saw that he was ready to undergo any
affliction rather than abate the right by any kind of faint-heartedness
or cowardice. His very opponents found out their own injustice when
they saw his steadfastness. And now the wisest men were set to mediate
upon the dowry of the church and the office-fee of the priest. The
lord bishop perceived that it was of more worth that many men and
those of great worship, that had up to this time been the opponents
of the church, should become her friends, even though Hogne had got
his prayer in this matter, that the church should rather have the
outlying land rather than the home land, as long as the church got
her full moneys in amount. And now they came on both sides--Ey-jolf
and Hogne and Thord and Snæ-laug--and got absolution. After that
the bishop went back to By, and there was a fair banquet there made
for him, and there was a great company and entertainment enough. The
bishop consecrated the church according to the charter which Hogne
and the bishop had agreed on. On the last day of the feast Hogne gave
the bishop seemly gifts, and they parted in friendship. Thence bishop
Thor-lac went to Staff-holt, and then Ey-jolf gave the bishop up the
claim for the money which Thor-laf had handselled for him. The lord
bishop went home that harvest. The lord bishop made peace with these
men in order to lessen the danger [of feud], but on neither side was
there a full understanding with the other.

4. Many men made great opposition to bishop Thor-lac, but some were
more open about it than others, because they held it to be hard-hearted
and merciless in him towards the people that he rebuked them for their
evil ways and the open sins of wicked men, and constrained with the
power and severity of Holy Church them that would not turn to good
ways at his comfortable admonitions.



5. 1. Swain [the Unlucky] was the name of a man, the son of Sturla
o' Hwam, a riotous and wicked man. This man took to his bed a near
kinswoman of his wife. He dwelt in Northern Reek-frith at Strands, in
the West-frith Quarter. The blessed bishop Thor-lac was much displeased
with this misconduct of his, and rebuked him, first with exhortations
and admonitions, and afterwards with prohibition and excommunication,
because Swain grew the more hardened in his wickedness the more often
the bishop admonished him to better his ways.

2. And at the time that the holy bishop Thor-lac went into this
Quarter, this same Swain gathered a gang to lie in ambush for the
bishop. They set out from home and on to the road by which they
thought the bishop would ride, but when they were come awhile from
the homestead there came a fog upon them so that they could not see
the way. And when they had gone on a long time they lay down on the
place they had reached by reason of the darkness, but the bishop and
his men rode the while in bright weather. But by the time that so
many men had gone to meet the bishop that Swain had no company to
match them, the darkness cleared, and they could now see that they
had gone astray, and also that the bishop had ridden by so that they
had no power over him. Then each man charged the other with losing
the way, and out of this dispute there sprang up such a curse upon
them that they came to blows, and Swain slew a man named Erne hard by
the hot spring that is there in the firth. Swain and his companions
got speedy and fit retribution for this wish of his to put compulsion
upon the man of God. But the bishop and his men went freely on their
way according to their will.



6. 1. The lord bishop Thor-lac charged many things against John
Loft's son of Ord, both for his adulteries and his wrongful gains,
and especially because he kept his [Thor-lac's] sister Ragn-eid at
home with him in flat defiance and disobedience in the lifetime of
his wife. But although John answered somewhat moderately with regard
to the other charges of the bishop, yet he would not come to any
reconciliation which should make him part with Ragn-eid. At last it
came to this that the bishop put him under prohibition. John was very
grieved to suffer compulsion from the bishop, both because of his pride
and also because many took an ill part in the questions between them,
and especially Thor-stan his son, that dwelt at Gunnere's-holt. He
egged on his father with unheard-of folly to outrage the bishop,
but John meant then as before to make the bishop flinch by a show of
violence rather than take weapons against him.

2. And once upon a time when bishop Thor-lac was going on a visitation
of his diocese, and his path lay over against the homestead at Ord,
John thought to take the bishop prisoner and force him to his will,
as he had done with many men. He set men on both sides of the passes
that lie east of the homestead, thinking the bishop must go by there,
for he was riding down from the Islands and up Wrang-water-fields. But
when they had crossed East Wrang-water, it seemed to them at Ord as if
a thick fog came up out of the sea, so that scarce anything could be
seen, and it lasted till the bishop and his men were out of sight. But
they that were in the ambush thought that the bishop must have gone
by another road. They that followed the bishop could see clearly men
sitting on either side of the passes, but inasmuch as they did not know
what it was for they went on without dread because the others offered
them no hurt. But when John perceived that his plan had broken down,
he rode out with certain men over his lands by another way, keeping up
with the bishop to the same intent. And yet he complained the while to
his friends, asking them what he was to do with regard to the harsh
treatment that he thought he was getting from the bishop. His son
Thor-stan was hard by him at the time, and he said, 'I will loose
this knot, father, and put an end to this bishop that treats men so
unjustly.' John answered, 'Thou shalt go and meet the bishop if it
like thee, but this piece of mischief will not fall to thee to overcome
Thor-lac at all; that will fall to no man but me alone, if I choose to
give myself to so doing.' Thor-stan said that he did not believe that,
and went forth with certain men, and they came to Fields, where the
bishop was sitting at table; and when they saw men come to the door
of the house, then they asked where the bishop was, and were told
that he was at table. Then Thor-stan fell to mighty threats against
the bishop if he were to come out of doors. They that had been to
the door went in, and were asked who it was that had come. They said
that there were come Thor-stan, John's son, and men with him fully
weaponed, and that Thor-stan was using mighty threats against him if
he should go out of doors. The bishop had been told before of what he
had said, and of his father's answer, and also of the whole intent of
John. The men of the house hindered the bishop from going out, but he,
fearless and unshaken against all danger from wicked men, answered,
'I will go to church as I am wont to do; this man will not do me any
harm.' The men of the house said then, 'Lord, sit in doors and sing
on your psalter, and do not venture yourself under the weapons of
this man of hell that shrinketh from naught.' The bishop answers,
'I will go as I had meant, but if this man do me any harm ... maybe
that I shall not then need any more....' After that the bishop went
out, and when Thor-stan beheld him he made no more ado but caught up
his axe, but it was not granted to him to strike him, for he could not
deal a stroke, but felt that God's power had hindered him. Meanwhile
the bishop looked at him, but did not speak, and walked on to the
church as he had meant. Thor-stan went to meet his father, and told
him of his journey how it had gone with him. Said John, 'It did not
go much otherwise than I supposed it would.' Then he was asked why he
had not cut at him with the axe. He said that his arm was stiffened
from the time the bishop looked at him until he got into the church,
so that he could not deal a stroke at him with the axe.

3. Nevertheless John Loft's son did not put away the enmity that he
had undertaken, but on the contrary he called his men about him, and
laid a plan on the day that the bishop was riding from Fell's-mull
to Clay-bank to sit in ambush for him at the place that is now
called Water-lithe, and he set men on both sides of the water-course
hard by the garth there. The bishop had ridden from the Fields to
Fell's-mull. This intent of John's reached the bishop and his men,
and they prayed him to ride another way that they might not fall in
with one another. But he himself was fearless about himself, and he
made the others fearless through his example, for he neither shrunk
from the multitude of men nor the weapons, but rode unshaken to the
men that were ready lying in wait for him. But Almighty God spread a
fog once more as [He had done] before over the road that he and his
men journeyed by, in such wise that they could find their way well and
see them that lay in wait for them, while John and his men could not
see the bishop or his men nor the way before the bishop and his men
had got out of sight. The bishop rode on that day as he had meant,
and was that night at Clay-bank, where he was welcome.

4. On the morrow it was made known to John that the bishop was about
to ride to Utter Scard, and he thereupon laid a plan to wait for him,
not on the road but right up at the homestead at Scard. Accordingly
he arranged so that from Bath's-garth up to Clove there should be a
lane of men on each side right up to the churchyard-gate. There John
himself was to stand, so that the bishop should not be able to get
to the homestead save he rode through this lane of men, and could not
get into the churchyard save he came face to face with John. And when
the morning came then it was done according to his intent. But before
the bishop rode away from Clay-bank he got to know of this device
of John's. And when they got as far as Bath's-garth the bishop's men
saw the two long lines of men drawn up between which they must ride,
and they made a halt. The bishop came up quickly and bade them not
be afraid, 'for this game is set for me and not for you.' He rode
foremost [of all] into the narrowing lane, and the next man to him was
priest Orm his chaplain, and the rest one after another behind him,
until the bishop got to the churchyard-gate, where John was standing,
and lit off his horse. There was no way of getting into the gate for
it was full of men, and there was no way of turning back, for a great
multitude of men was closing about them from all sides. There were no
greetings passed. The bishop said, 'What! dost think, John, to forbid
me the church?' John answers, 'That depends on you.' The bishop said,
'It seems to me as if thou wouldst have thy way, but I wish to know why
thou doest this?' John answers, 'Ye have forbidden me the church for
a long time, and thou hast threatened to excommunicate me; therefore I
wished to bring about our meeting in such wise, that it should depend
upon myself and not on you.' The bishop said, 'True it is that I have
uttered my prohibition against thee for a rightful charge, but I have
put off the infliction of my excommunication, because I hoped that
thou wouldst have the wisdom to get rid of thy troubles; but if thou
do not so, know of a truth that I will not put off excommunicating
thee any longer, and it would have been better if it had been done
before now.' 'I know,' said John, 'that thy excommunication is lawful,
and the charge sufficient; and I am willing to suffer thy sentence
in this way, I will go into the desert of Thor's-mark or into some
such place, where the common folk shall not be guilty of conversation
with me, and there I will live with the woman whom ye are rebuking
me for, and your excommunication shall not part me from my troubles,
nor any man's compulsion, until God breathes into my breast to part
willingly with them. But take heed to yourself that I mean to fix
matters so that ye shall do this service to no second man after me, or
that I shall be the last man you serve so.' The bishop was silent at
these words for awhile, but at last he spoke. 'I am ready to suffer
all that may happen to me in this matter. Do as thou wilt, for I
am ready now to lay my ban on thee without further delay for fear
of thy threats.' Answers John, 'If thou mean to do as thou sayest,
surely I will not risk another meeting between us [i. e. I will slay
thee here].' But though John said this the bishop did not flinch
before him one whit. But Orm the priest that stood next him saw that
John would not soften his anger [i. e. was growing more enraged], and
that they that had egged him to wickedness before were ready to bring
about what he had threatened. He ran out in front of the bishop, and
said, 'I adjure you, my lord, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
not to let fall thy ban upon John and your sister at this time, but
rather do ye wait, if peradventure the hour may come which John gave
hope of, when he will himself part from her and take absolution from
you. Consider, my lord, if ye think it a great hurt for the church to
wait awhile, how much more she will suffer by the loss of both of you
in one day; for John will surely make that good which he has clearly
promised. Look you, though ye put your body in jeopardy for God's sake,
yet the lighter sin is not thereby atoned for if there follow a heavier
sin still, and it is better to wait for good with long-suffering than
to increase offences.' At first the bishop looked sternly upon him,
but because there were many that upheld what he had said, he spake,
'Now it is as before, thou wilt have thy way, John, though thou art in
the wrong, but were I sure that my delay would come to good, I would
risk it for all this.' All they that were there rejoiced at this,
that he gave a hope that he would stay the excommunication, and that
so the bishop might escape from the peril of his life. After that John
was asked when he would give any such amends as he had given hope of
if the bishop would stay the ban. Says John, 'The bishop must rest
satisfied to wait if there is to be no assault, but it must be at my
own pleasure to fix the time and way.' And the end of their meeting was
this, that the bishop promised not to set greater compulsion upon John
for awhile, and John let the bishop go to the church, and rode away.

5. After this a few months went by, and then John put away Ragn-eid,
and they got absolution and shrift from the bishop.  And somewhat later
Ragn-eid was given in marriage to an Eastman whose name was Arn-thor,
and from them many men have sprung. But the bishop parted John and
her all his life, and would not let them meet or speak, save before
witnesses and in public places. But there was never much love between
the bishop and John as long as they both lived. And as for Thor-stan
John's son that wished to slay bishop Thor-lac, as was aforesaid, he
turned out the greatest failure, so that his father and his brothers
gat great sorrow by reason of him.

6. A little after these things had happened, John Loft's son had a
church and a cloister-house built north of a brook at the Wells, and
he meant to enter the cloister himself, but there were no men appointed
thereto [as monks]. But when bishop Thor-lac heard a report of this he
enquired, as if he had not heard it, whether John was minded to raise
a cloister at Wells. He was told that it was true. Then he asked,
'To what saint does he mean to give the cloister?' They that were
present said he meant to give the cloister to John the Baptist. The
bishop said, 'It was a great marvel if he accept that which was
gathered in the way it was gained.' These words were not spoken in
vain, for when John came to Wells he was shortly taken ill, and when
the illness began to grow upon him he had himself led out of doors,
and as he looked towards the church, he said, 'There thou standest,
my church; thou grievest for me, and I grieve for thee.' For then
he could see that there was little hope of its establishment if he
were called away. After his death his son Sæ-mund in his day kept the
church and houses in repair, but when he was gone his sons pulled down
the church and houses, and shared them among them as their heritage,
and thus was fulfilled that which was foretold in the words of the
holy bishop Thor-lac.










CHAPTER 6

§ 6. FRAGMENTS FROM GUNLAUG'S LIFE OF S. JOHN OF HOLAR.

About a century after the former Life of S. John, an ecclesiastic
determines to re-edit his Life; he accordingly takes the old Life
and amplifies this in the rhetorical style of his own day. And with
this Life he inserts (a) the tale of Gisle Illugeson and the King, a
little tale now found in the collections of the Kings' Lives in Hulda
and Hrockinskinna; (b) a legend of the Vergilius kind about Sæmund and
bishop John, which cannot be earlier than the 14th century; and (g)
besides these he had at his disposal, as he tells us, a Latin Life of
S. John by Gunlaug the monk; of this he translated and stuffed into the
old Life as much as he could. The difference of style and diction would
betray these additions, even if we had not the older Life of S. John
to compare them with, and prove them Latin additions. The pieces of
this Biography by Gunlaug we have collected and printed together.

It must have been written during the time Gunlaug and bishop
Godmund were friends (see Prologue, § 2), that is to say, after
1203 and before 1211. It is marked as Gunlaug's by the translator
and compiler's adding, saith Gunlaug who hath composed the Latin
History [of the Bishop], and, saith brother Gunlaug, and the like,
which leave no doubt.

In my first edition (of 1857) of this Second Life of John, which I
printed as it stands in the MS., I believed that Gunlaug had written
the whole Second Life, an error here corrected. It is impossible for
Gunlaug to have written the Vergil tale, and he was not the man to
amplify another man's writing, while he is always associated, as here,
with Latin writings.

The text rests on Holm. No. 5, fol. (described in Introduction to §
3), AM. 219, and the Christiania fragment.

The chronology of the original Biography of S. John has by the
14th-century [[215, 235, 239, 240: 23, 27.]] editor been altered to
the received chronology, whence arise confusions in his text, as is
the case of the Second Life of Thorlac.

The Prologue gives a fair specimen of the Latin ecclesiastic
composition of the time, what the Icelanders called a 'dict.' Only §§
3, 4 give new facts, and are accordingly translated.






[Prologue.]

1. Meðr þvi at miskunnar faðer ok Guð allrar hugganar, vórr Herra Jesus
Christr, hefir leitt vóra forfeðr frá ó-trú ok til almennelegrar ok
sannrar trúar, ok grund-vallat sína borg ok einkanlega plantað sínn
vín-garð, heilaga Cristne, um Norðlendinga fiórðung fyrer roeksamlega
predican heilags lifnaðar ens blezaða Ioans Hóla biskops, skipande
hann oss foðor ok for-stióra, lífs lære-foðor ok háleitan5 árnaðar-mann
þeim er á hann kalla með sannre trú ok hreino hiarta ser til fulltings
ok ténaðar: því hofom ver ætlað með Guðs fulltinge fram at bera með
réttlegre frá-sogn þat kraftanna liós, sem þesse enn ágæte Guðs geisle,
enn heilage Ión biskop, hefer fagrlega lýst með ok prýtt, eige at eins
sína fóstr-iorð, heldr ok nær-verande lond þessa konungs-ríkis, kunnikt
gerande efter-komande þióðom þessa góða mannz10 verk, siðo ok siðferðe,
at heyrande menn þessa frá-sogn hitne því framar í ást ok elsko viðr
þenna Guðs vin, sem þeir heyra fleire dásamleg tákn ok krafta-verk,
er Guð hefer gert firer hans volduga verðleika, ok at liós-ker hans
krafta-verka, upp sett á háfa kersi-stiko, lýse [1784] ollom biartlega
Cristnennar sonom, ok brott reke meðr sínne birte vór synda myrkr, ok
at góðom monnom sé fram settr biartr spegell15 fagrlegs efter-dæmes,
þeim sem efter vilja líkja dýrðar-fullo sið-ferðe þessa ágæta biskops.

2. Hofom ver þessa frá-sogn,--seger Gunnlaugr munkr, siðugr maðr ok
góðrar minningar, er Látínu-(soguna) dictað hefer,--af oss ellrom
monnom ok meir-háttar numet, ok eige af einne saman vórre ofdirfð ok
hvat-víse þetta veik upp byrjat,20 heldr at boðe ok á-eggjan verðlegs
herra Guðmundar biskops.

3. Biðjom ver alla þá sem þessa frá-sogn heyra, at firer vórn ólistugan
framburð ok ó-sniallt orða-til-tæke fyrer-diarfe þeir eige svá háleitt
efne sem ver munom fram flytja, heldr umbæte meðr ást ok elsku þar
sem þeir siá þess með þurfa.



1. Þá er enn heilage Ioan hafðe skamma stund veret biskop, lét hann
setja scóla25 heima þar á staðnom, vestr frá kirkjo-durom, ok let
smíða val ok vandlega; 'hvern ver sám með vórum augom' (seger Bróðer
Gunnlaugr er Látinu-sogona hefir saman sett)....

2. Heilagr Ion biskop tók marga menn til kenslo, ok feck til góðan
meistara at kenna Grammaticam, Gísla hinn Gauzka, er fyrr var geteð. En
einn Franzeis,30 sæmilegan prest-mann, er Rikini hét, capalin sínn,
feck hann til at kenna song-list ok versa-gerð. Rikini var klerkr góðr,
bæðe diktaðe hann vel ok versaðe; ok svá gloeggr var hann í song-list
ok minnigr, at hann kunne útan-bókar allan song á tolf mánoðom, bæðe í
dag-tíðom ok óttu-songom, með oeruggre tona setning ok hlióða grein; ok
þá réðozt margra góðra manna born under hond þessom tveim meistorom,35
sumer at nema Látíno, en aðrer song, eða hvárt-tveggja, kost-gæfande,
hverr eftir síno næme, at fylla vand-laupa síns hiarta af þeim molom
vizko-brauðs, er þeirra kenni-feðr bruto þeim til andlegrar fæðo; af
hverjom ver sám blóma-berlegan akr guðlegrar miskunnar með fogrom ilm
víða upp runnenn. Við þessom tók Rikine prestr ollom með fagnaðe ok
blíðo heilags Iohannis, ok elskaðe sem einka sono,40 nærðe ok fóstraðe
under sinne for-siá ok gæzlo, varð-veitande þá under sínom vængjom,
sem fugl sína unga. Her mátte siá um oll hús biskops-stólsens mikla
iðn ok at-hofn: sumer láso heilagar ritningar, sumer ritoðo, sumer
sungo, sumer námo, sumer kendo. Enge var ofund þeirra í millum eða
sundr-þycke; engi á-gangr eða þrætne; hverr vilde annan ser meira
háttar: Hlýðne helt þar hverr við annan; ok45 þegar signum var til
tíða gert, skundoðo aller þegar or sínom smá-kofom til kirk­jonnar,
sætlegan seim sem þrifet bý-flyge til bý-stocks heilagrar kirkjo með
ser [[240: 27.]] berande, hvert þeir hofðo saman boret or lystilegom
vín-ciallara heilagra ritninga. Meðr tíða upp-hafning hófzt í
kirkjonne fagrleg sam-hlióðan songsens í córenom, ok hófzt [1785]
sætleg hlióð raddanna. Engenn fór þar með lausung eða marg-mælge;
hiner ellre menn ok meire háttar vóro með staðfeste ok at-hoga,
en unger menn haldner ok siðaðer under stiórn hinna ellre manna;
ok algerðo svá hvárer-tveggjo fagrlega5 sítt embætti; ok skein með
þvílíkre birte yfir-lit heilagrar Cristne under þessom heilaga biskope.


3. Aller hiner sæmelegsto kennemenn í Norðlendinga fiórðunge
vóru nockora hríð til náms at Hólom; þá sem vórr alldr (seger
bróðer Gunnlaugr) mátte muna, sumer af barndóme, sumer á10 fulltíða
aldre. Marger af sagðra meistara læresveinom aondoðozt á vórum daogom;
en einn af þeim var Ísleifr Hallzson, hvern Ión biskop æskte at vera
skyllde biskop næst efter hann, ok ténaðar-mann síns biskopsdóms,
ef hann mædde elle: en hann andaðezt fyr en herra biskop.15

4. En at ek nefna nockora sagðra læresveina, þá er ek sá mínom augom:
var einn af þeim Kloengr, er síðan var biskop í Scál-holte; var
hann xij vetra gamall á hende folgenn Ione biskope af móðor sínne til
fræðe-náms; ok varð hann hinn bezte clerkr, ok var lenge síðan sæmelegr
kennemaðr í Hóla-kirkjo, hinn meste20 upphallz-maðr Cristninnar,
predicande fagrlega Guðs orð under stiórn ok yfer-boðe tveggja Hóla
biskopa, Ketils ok Biarnar; hafðe hann marga vaska lære-sveina under
ser, ritande bækr margar ok merkelegar, þær sem enn tiázt at Hólom ok
víða annars-staðar. Vilmundr var þar ok lærðr, er fyrstr var ábóte á
Þingeyrom: svá25 ok Hreinn, er þar var hinn þriðe ábóte. Marger vóro
ok þar aðrer í scóla, þeir er síðan urðo mektuger kenne-menn: Ísleifr
Gríms son, frænde biskops; Ión Svarte; Biarne Bergþórs son; Biaorn er
[[241: 27.]] síðan var enn þriðe byskop at Hólom; ok marger aðrer þeir
er langt er frá at segja. Þar var ok í fræðe-náme hrein-ferðug jungfrú
er Ingunn hét. Ongom þessom var hon lægre í saogðom bók-listom; kennde
hon maorgom Grammaticam, ok frædde hvern er nema vilde; urðo því marger
val menter under hennar hende. Hon5 rædde [1786] miok Látíno-bækr,
svá at hon lét lesa fyrir ser; en hon sialf saumaðe, teflde, eða (vann)
aðrar hann-yrðer með heilagra manna saogom, kynnande maonnom Guðs dýrð,
eige at eins með orðom munn-náms, heldr ok með verkom handanna.


5. Nú flióta slíker hluter fram af einne upp-sprettu; ok siá ávoxtr af
einne vín-viðar10 hríslu, þat er hinn heilage Iohannes. Kallazt sialfr
Dróttinn sætt vín-tré, en hans valðer menn vínviðar-kvistir, efter þí
sem seger í Guðspiallino: Ego sum vitis vera et vos palmites. Nú svá
sem hinn heilage Iohannes lærðe ok frædde folk heima á staðnom fyrer
þílíka menn ok meistara sem talder vóru, svá boðaðe hann ok sialfr
Guðs eyrinde í kenningom um allar sveiter, þá er hann visiteraðe sítt
biskups-dæme.15 Svá mikit hófzt fræðe fýse ok náms með kostgæfe þessa
blezaða biskups, at oðrum megum stóðu at klerkar, oðrum-megum leikmenn,
hverr at lesa með heilagre græðge í sínn minnis-sióð þat er fá mælte
af nægð guðlegra auðæfa.







3. All the priest-clerks in the Northlanders' Quarter were some time
at Holar for learning,--those which our age [nostra etas] says brother
Gun-laug could remember, some from childhood up, some in the fulness of
their age. Many of the said masters of the scholars died in our days,
and one of them was Is-laf Hall's son, whom bishop John wished to be
bishop next after him, and a helper or suffragan in his bishopric,
if he grew helpless by age; but he died before the lord bishop.

4. But that I may name some of the said scholars whom I saw with mine
eyes, one of them was Clong that was afterward bishop in Scal-holt. He
was, when twelve winters old, given into the hands of bishop John
by his mother for schooling. And he was the best of clerks, and was
long after a seemly clerk in Holar church, the greatest upholder
of Christendom or the Church, fairly preaching God's Word under the
governance and authority of two Holar bishops, Cetil and Beorn. He had
many brisk scholars under him, writing many and markworthy books which
are still read at Holar and far and wide in other places. Wil-mund
was also schooled there, who was the first abbot at Thing-eyre. So
also Hran that was the third abbot there.  There were many others
there in the school that later became mighty clerks--Is-laf Grim's
son, a kinsman of the bishop's, John Swart, Bearne Berg-thor's son,
Beorn that afterwards was the third bishop of Holar, and many others
that it is long to tell of. There was also in the school a pure-living
maiden, whose name was Ingun. She was not second to any in the said
book-learning; she taught many Grammatica, and instructed whomsoever
wished to learn, and many became good scholars under her hands. She
read many Latin books, having them read before her while she herself
was sewing or embroidering or made other handiwork, with the Lives
of the Saints, teaching men God's glory not only with the words of
her mouth but also with the work of her hands.










CHAPTER 7

§ 7. BIOGRAPHICA MINORA.


We have here gathered a few scattered anecdotes and incidents relating
to the bishops of Iceland.



    1. The Tale of Bishop Islaf's Marriage.
    2. The Praise of Gizor by Harold Hardrede.
    3. Bishop Magnus Einarsson and King Gilchrist.



No. 1 is preserved in Flatey-book, vol. ii. pp. 140-142 (see
Icel. Reader, p. 148).

No. 2 in Harold Hardrede's Saga, Hulda (see Reader, p. 141).

No. 3. Morkinskinna and Kringla give the better, Hulda and
Hrockinskinna a somewhat wordier text, hence preference is to be
given to Morkinskinna.

The fourth tale in some respects supplies the lack of a life of bishop
Cetil, Are's friend, and the co-author, with bishop Thorlac the first,
of the Christian Law, a man who left his mark upon Icelandic life. He
came of a good family, being lineally descended from Godmund the
Mighty and Helge the Lean, the Settlers (Sturl. ii. 492). It was his
interference and wise and patient bearing that averted a civil war
at the memorable All-moot of the year 1121, mentioned in Mantissa,
ch. 1. 3-6 (p. 268), and raised him to the bishopric of the North. The
scene in which he tells the tale of his blemish--he had been blinded
in one eye by a stab--is finely dramatic, recalling the fable Agrippa
tells to the Seceders.

For the text of Cetil and Haflide, see the editor's Sturlunga Saga,
vol. i. pp. 29 sqq. (ii. chs. 21 and 28-30).

Another and shorter version of the story is here appended as given in
Liosvetninga Saga--an abstract of the fuller account in Sturlunga. By
a scribe's error, we think, Sturlunga calls Godmund 'Grim's son,'
Liosvetninga 'the son of Odde, the son of Grim.'



Tales of Bisop Is-laf.

Is-laf, the son of Gizor the White, was a fair man and goodly,
not of great height, the most beloved of men. He was at school in
Saxland [Saxony] when he was young. It is told once on a time as he
was journeying from the south and came through Norway that there
was then with king Olaf [Harold's son] Brand the Free-handed. Him
the king held in high esteem, and on a certain holiday he said,
'Brand, receive this cloak from me.' It was a mantle of scarlet,
lined with gray fur. Brand and Is-laf met in the town, and it was
a glad meeting. Is-laf was then a priest and poor when he came
from the south lands. And Brand said, 'Thou shalt take of me this
cloak which the king gave me.' He answered, 'Thou hast not lost thy
generous heart yet, and I will gladly take it.' And one holiday,
as Brand was at the king's table, the king spake and looked at him:
'Why hast thou not the cloak, Brand, which I gave thee?' He answered,
'Lord, I have given it to a priest.' The king said, 'I would see that
priest, and know what reason there may be in him for thee to part
so soon with a king's gift.' Men also began to speak the same way,
and say that he had dealt wonderfully with such a man's gift. And at
church Brand said to the king, 'Lord, there stands the priest in the
church, and he has the cloak on.' The king looked at him, and said,
'Now we too will change places, Brand, for I will now give him the
cloak myself, and call him now to me, this priest.' Brand said that
he would do so. Then Is-laf came before the king and greeted him. The
king took his greeting well, and said, 'The cloak that Brand gave thee,
priest, I will give thee, and I will pay Brand the worth thereof, for
I am so pleased with thee, that I will commend me to thy prayers.' He
answered, 'Lord, I thought the gift of Brand very good, but now it
is more worshipful still to receive it from thee with this speech.'

Afterwards he went to Iceland, and his kinsfolk thought it good
that he should strengthen his position by taking a wife. He was a
poor man, but he had a good farm at Scal-holt, and a gode-hood. Then
he went north to Withe-dale to Asgeir's-river, where there dwelt a
man whose name was Thor-wald, who had a daughter named Dalla [Blind,
Irish]. They got there early in the day, and the franklin greeted him
and asked them to stay with him. But Is-laf said that he wished first
to talk with him, 'for the matter stands so that I am come a-courting
hither, and would ask thee for thy daughter.' Said he, 'There are good
reports of thee, and I will answer thee thus: thou shalt come hither
to the north and live if thou wilt make this match.' He answered,
'I do not think that that would suit me to leave my estate and my
office and household, and we had better depart.' Then they turned
their horses and rode away. But Dalla was on the top of a hay-rick,
and she was the fairest of women. Thor-wald went up to where she was
sitting, and she said, 'Who were those strangers?' He told her. 'What
was their errand hither?' He said they came a-courting for her. Said
she, 'How didst thou answer?' He told her. Said she, 'That would have
not stood in the way of the match if I had the ruling of it.' Answered
he, 'Art thou very desirous of this match?' Answered she, 'So it is,
for I have this ambition to have the best husband and the best son
by him that shall be born in Iceland, and I do not think it would be
foolish to go after him.' Said he, 'Thy will has ever had weight with
me.' So they sent men to ride after them [and bring them back]. Then
Thor-wald said that he declared he thought that it ought not to stand
in the way of the match, even though Is-laf could not come and live
in the north near him. Is-laf was pleased with this decision, and she
[Dalla] was given him to wife, and they dwelt afterwards at Scal-holt,
and had sons, Gizor and Tait and Thor-wald, and they were all goodly
men, though one carried it above all the rest. Gizor was a big man
and strong. It was afterwards the counsel of the people of this land
to have a bishop over them, and to this office Is-laf was chosen,
and he went abroad to be hallowed bishop, and came back and dwelt at
Scal-holt, but Dalla would take care of half the estate. It was in
those days no easy matter to get men to make offerings. There were
no tithes then, but there were tolls [sic] laid over all the land.

Is-laf was the noblest of men in his ways. John Ogmund's son, who was
afterwards bishop of Holar, was bred up in his house, and he used
to speak these words of praise respecting Is-laf, whenever any one
was talking about men who were goodly or skilful or good in any way:
'So was Is-laf, my foster-father; he was the goodliest of men, the most
skilful of men, the best of all men!' They would say, 'Who was speaking
of him then, lord?' He would answer, 'He always comes into my head when
I hear speak of a good man, for I proved him to be so in every way.'


Of Bishop Gizor.

When Gizor, the son of bishop Is-laf, came to see king Harold
[Hardrede], it was said of him that he was a man of mark. Then spake
king Harold: 'It is as ye say, for out of Gizor three men might be
made. He might be a wicking captain, and he is well suited to be
so. He might also be a king for his nature, and he is well suited to
be so. In the third place he might be a bishop, and for this office
he is best suited of the three; and this office he shall get, and be
held a most noble man therein.'


Bishop Magnus and King Gilchrist.

It is said that in his days there came from Iceland for his
consecration as bishop, Magnus Einar's son, and the king was cordial
towards him, and showed him great honour. And when the bishop was ready
to go over sea, and his ship bound and ready, the bishop went into
the room where the king was drinking, and he greeted him honourably
and welcomed him. The king received him well and blithely. The queen
was sitting beside the king. Then the king said, 'Lord bishop, are ye
now bound abroad?' He answered, 'True it is!' 'Thou hast not hit on
the right time to come now, bishop, when the table is taken away, for
there is nothing now left to give thee as worthy of thee as there ought
to be. Now what is there to give the bishop?' The treasurer answered,
'The jewels are now given away, I think.' Said the king, 'There is
the drinking-cup here [on the table] left. Take that, bishop; there
is money in it, or it is worth money.' The bishop thanks him for his
present. Then the queen said, 'Farewell and hail, lord bishop!' The
king said to her, 'Farewell and hail, lord bishop! Whoever heard a
noble lady make such a speech to her bishop and give him nothing?' She
answered, 'What is there left to give him, lord?' The king said, 'There
is the cushion under thee!' Then it was given him, and it was covered
in pall, and was the most costly ornament. And when the bishop turned
to go, the king gave him the cushion from under him also, saying,
'They have long been together.' Then the bishop went abroad out to
Iceland to his see, and people asked what should be done with the
drinking-cup, so that it might do the king most good. The bishop
sought counsel with his people; some said that it should be sold
and the price given to the poor. Then the bishop said, 'I will take
another counsel: I will make a chalice of it for the cathedral here,
and I will consecrate it with such preamble that his soul [the king's]
may get good thereby, and I wish and trust that all the saints of the
halidoms here in this holy church may each do the king his separate
good whenever mass is sung over it [the chalice].' And this chalice
hath been ever since at the cathedral at Scal-holt; but of the brocade
that covered the cushions which the king and queen gave him were
made the four choir-copes now at the cathedral. In this matter ye
may mark the great-heartedness or munificence of king Harold. [The
king and bishop met in the summer of 1135, but on Dec. 13, 1136,
Gilchrist was murdered.]

We subjoin the text from Morkinskinna (M.), (H. = Hulda and
Hrockinskinna, Hkr. = Heimskringla.)




Þat er sagt at á hans dogom com af Íslande til byscops-vígslo Magnús
Einarsson, oc var konungr ágetlega til hans oc veitte hónom mikenn
sóma. Oc er byscop var í brot búenn oc scipet var al-búet, þá gecc
byscop inn í stofona er konungr dracc oc quadde hann virðilega oc
fagnaðe hónom. Konungr tóc vel við hónom oc blíðlega. Dróttning
sat hiá konunge. Þá melte konungr: 'Herra byscop! eroð ér [1787]5
nú búner í brot?' Hann svaraðe: 'Satt er þat.'--'Ecke hitter
þú nú í tíma til er ér kómot nú, byscop, er borðen vóro uppi:
nú er ecki til at gefa þer svá virðilict sem scylde. Eða hvat
er til at gefa byscope?' Fé-hirðirenn svaraðe: 'Upp etlom ver nú
gefnar goersimar.' Konungr melte: 'Til er borð-keret hérna; þigg þat
byscop; fé er í. Byscop þaccar hónom sínn sóma.' Þá melte dróttning:
'Far heill10 oc sell, herra byscop!' Konungr melte til hennar: 'Far
heill oc sell, herra byscop! hverja heyrðer þú slíct mela gofga kono
við byscop sínn oc gefa hónom ecci.' Hon svaraðe: 'Hvat er nú til,
herra?' Konungr melte: 'Til er hc' gyndit under þer.' Siðan var þat
teket, oc var scoret um pell, oc enn dýrlegste gripr. Oc er byscop
veic í brot, þá lét konungr taca undan ser hc' gyndet oc melte:
'Lenge hafa þau15 saman veret.' Síðan fór byscop í brot oc út til
Íslannz til stóls síns; oc var þá roett um hvat af borð-kereno scylde
gera þess er konunge gegnde bezt. Byscop leitaðe ráðs við menn; melte
sumer at selt monde oc gefet tá toecom monnom verðet. Þá melte byscop:
'Annat ráð vil-ec taca, goera scal af calec her at staðnom, oc vil-ek
svá firer mela at hann nióte. Oc vilda-ec at þeir ener helgo menn
aller, er20 her er af helger dómar [1788] í þesse enne helgo kirkjo
láte konung hvert sinn nióta, er ifer hónom er messa sungen.' Oc sá
calecr er æ síðan [1789] at slaðnom í Scála-holte. En af pellonom
er ifir vóro dregen hoegenden, oc konungr oc dróttning gáfo hónom,
ero nú goervar firer-soengs-cápor þar at staðnom. Í þessom hlut má
marca stórlete Harallz konungs.








Of Cetil and Haf-lide.

[21.] And now in the summer both sides gathered in numbers to the
All-moot all that they could get. And men rode to the Moot the next
day before S. John's-day [June 23], Haf-lide and his sons-in-law, Hall
Tait's son [Haf-lide's brother-in-law and the bishop-elect of 1149],
and divers companies with them. They rode early in the day to the Moot,
and Haf-lide turned to the booth of Thor-gils and broke it all down to
the ground, and then Hall egged Haf-lide that he and his men should
ride to meet Thor-gils with the troop they had. He declared moreover
that 'it was a great dishonour and great lawlessness for outlawed
men to ride to a hallowed Moot, and let us be mindful of this, that
he would not let us carry out the court of execution which ought to
be by law, unless there had been a battle.'

And then they rode up to the Wallds and made an ambush there; but
it went slowly, for there were some that did not wish it, for many
men put in their words and would stop such an ambush, saying that
both sides would be more easily led to peace, but much evil would
befall many men if they did not come to terms. Many men of good will
mediated, and there were many delays, and they would not ride further,
but alighted. Then priest Cetil Thor-stan's son came up and asked,
'Art thou the head of this ambush, Haf-lide?' 'Surely I am,' answered
Haf-lide. Said Cetil, 'This plan is not a good one, for it may well
be that Thor-gils will take the plan of riding by night, or not by
the highway, if he mean to carry the matter by force.' And while they
were talking bishop Thor-lac came up, and asked Haf-lide to come home
to his booth, and they would try and bring about peace. He answers,
'This matter is now a great deal more imperative, and touches me more
nearly, for it cannot be submitted to or brought into discussion,
that outlawed men should ride to a hallowed Moot, and the laws of the
land broken withal. And it will soon be proved such a precedent as many
other men will follow if this man be allowed to do so.' Then said the
bishop, 'It is true that thou sayest; but is this true which we have
heard, that this season thou hast sought help all over the country,
from chiefs and from small folk, yea, even poor men and every old
cottage wife?' 'Surely it is true,' says Haf-lide. The bishop said,
'It is a lowly deed for such a man as thou art to wish that all men
should be on thy side in their hearts and prayers. But yet this must
be said, that thou, a wise man, art very greatly mistaken if thou wilt
have all the vilest folk on thy side, and against thee that glorious
man whose feast it is to-morrow, and who is well-nigh the most noble
of all God's saints, as God Himself witnesseth, and surely his wrath
will depend on it, and thou shalt incur it if thou art minded to shed
so many men's blood for this cause. But it is most likely, if thou
art willing to forego this on this holiday, and not break the peace,
that God and His champion John the Baptist will grant thee the greater
share of honour in this suit. And in the second place, thy gain in
this case is as nought compared to that which shall be paid thee in
the other world for what thou wilt do now for the sake of God and John
the Baptist.' Then Haf-lide answered, 'There is truth in thy speaking,
but yet I cannot bear that the Moot should be performed in such a
lawless way, that outlaws should ride to the Moot.' And they parted,
so that Haf-lide refused what the bishop asked. There were then in his
array twelve hundred [1440] men. And then the bishop forbade all clerks
to go into his company, and ordered all the commonalty to part them....

[28.] When the bishop had called all the clerks to him, he went
a second time to see Haf-lide and his men, and spake: 'Art thou,
Haf-lide, determined to pay no heed to any man's words nor willing to
go home?' 'That is uppermost in my mind,' says Haf-lide. The bishop
said, 'Then we will go home to the church, and by the power that God
gave Peter the Apostle to bind and loose all in earth and in heaven,
and which he [Peter] gave to pope Clement, and man to man handed it on,
and archbishop Auzor gave it me, and by the force of that power will
I forbid thee to stay here, and refuse terms and break the peace. I
have got word from Thor-gils that he is willing to make thee a fair
offer.' And the bishop ended his speech so. 'And for all these lawful
reasons together, if my speech or our prayers may at all prevail with
God, I pray that He be so gracious to thy prayer at doomsday as thou
art now to me.' Then Haf-lide said, 'Let the end of the case between me
and Thor-gils go as it is fated, and let every man put such face on it
as he please. But for this argument of thine, I will not do battle for
a whole day, if the others do not ride down on us, if thou and these
men will promise not to let my case go before it turn in some way to my
honour.' 'And thou alone to make the award,' says Hall Tait's son. And
men consented thereto. Then Einar Gils' son said, 'Do thou, Haf-lide,
follow the good counsel which the bishop hath set forth to thee, and
we will give thee the same backing after the holiday as we would now.'

And then Haf-lide and his men went home to their booths. But on the
other side Thor-gils and his men rode to his booth in the field,
and could there see by the marks left that his booths were broken
down. Many men offered him their own awnings, but he would none,
and would have nothing else than that his own booth should be put
up. And then Sæ-mund the historian set about doing it with certain
men, and they began to put up the booth in the evening, and it was
finished before prime next morning, working all night.

And now men sought to bring about a peace between Thor-gils and
Haf-lide, but Haf-lide would have no other terms than self-doom. And
Thor-gils did not deny this, that Haf-lide should give an award of
as much money as he asked for his honour, but he would not have
him award any outlawry or deprive any one of his gode-hood or
estate. And so matters stood fast over the holiday, that Haf-lide
would have self-doom without any terms. And the friends of both were
in great need of some arbitrament between them. But on the morrow of
the holiday [June 25], late in the evening, when most men had laid
them down to sleep, Cetil Thor-stan's son went to Haf-lide's booth
with certain men. And he was welcomed there, and he said to Haf-lide,
'Great pity will your friends think it if no terms can be agreed upon
and the case settled peacefully, howbeit many men think this is past
hope now or well-nigh so. And I am not the man to give thee counsel;
but I will tell thee a parable. [29.] We all grew up together in
Ey-frith, and it was said that we were a promising family. Moreover I
got her in marriage who was deemed the best of matches, Groa daughter
of bishop Gizor. But it was said that she was not faithful to me, and
I was grieved; but the case was taken up and proofs made, and she was
cleared. But nevertheless I was aggrieved at the rumour that was set
about, and therefore I fixed my hate upon the man [who was rumoured
to be my rival]. And once upon a time when we met upon the highway,
I made an onslaught upon him, meaning to overcome him, but he ran
under the stroke, and [we wrestled and] I fell beneath him. Then he
drew his knife and stabbed me in the eye, so that I lost the sight
thereof, and then the man Godmund Grim's son let me stand up. And
this was somewhat unlikely to have happened, for as far as I could
tell I had twice his strength, and I believed that there would be
no difference in strength between us in other matters. But I wished
to get a revenge with a will for this by means of the strength of my
kinsfolk, and make the man an outlaw, and we set the case afoot. But
yet there came forth men of power on his side to defend his case, and
so my case was quashed.--And now it may well be that certain men come
forward in the same way to defend Thor-gils, though thy case be the
more righteous.--And when it was come to this pass they offered me boot
in money therefore. But I bethought me of what I had undergone, and
how hardly all had happened to me as long as I refused the boot. For
I saw then that my sole help was to cast my case upon the mercy of
God, for before that time all had gone grievously to my dishonour in
the whole case, and unless I set aside the haughtiness and the pride
[inherent to us] the Madder-field-men, I saw that it would be a heavy
bargain yet for me [1790]. I also perceived this, that when I was
thinking over the condition of myself and my foe, that I could get no
such boot from him as would be sufficient restitution of honour for
me. So for God's sake I determined to give up the whole case to him,
for I knew that I should then receive in return what would be much
more useful to me. [But Godmund became poor and lacked everything
[1791].] And then I asked him to my house, and he was with me long
afterwards. And straightway the ill report was turned away, and with
it the opinion held of myself and Godmund, and everything afterwards
turned out more lucky and more honourable to me than before. And I
hope to God that so it may be to thee, and do thou pick out of my
chattels what thou thinkest most useful to thee,' says Cetil.

Then Haf-lide thanked him warmly, and said, 'There hath been a matter
under consideration at the Moot that is of great import, whom we
North-country-men shall choose for bishop in bishop John's place, and
the Moot past have given the matter over to my choice. But because
of this case of ours I have not given my decision so quickly as I
should otherwise have done. But now I need look about no longer over
the matter, and I will hear of nothing else this summer but that thou
be chosen bishop, and it is my belief that it will be the best thing
for the people of this land, considering the choice of men they have,
if thou become bishop.' And their conversation had a great effect,
and Haf-lide was henceforward more bent on peace than before, and
much meeker of behaviour.

Then Cetil said, 'I am unfitted for such a charge as this. All men
can see how great a blemish there is upon me in men's eyes. But there
are much greater blemishes in my heart in God's eyes, and I am not
suited to the dignity of a bishopric.' Nevertheless it came about
at the end of their talk that Cetil said, 'If your case were to be
the nearer peace than before thereby, then I would not gainsay this
burden, if it be the will of others as it is thine.'

After this occurrence a peace was sought afresh between them by men
of goodwill, and it came about, though with difficulty, and Hall was
more backward over it right through than was Haf-lide. Nevertheless
this settlement was made, that Haf-lide should award himself as much
money as he liked in return for the wrong he had suffered, but all
outlawries, loss of gode-hood and estate were forbidden, according
to the terms first offered.


The short Account.

He [Odde Grim's son] was the father of Godmund that stabbed out
bishop Cetil's eye. And it came about thus--those who were no friends
of Godmund brought this to Cetil's ears when he was dwelling at
Madder-weald, that he was beguiling his wife Groa, the daughter of
bishop Gizor. And they happened to meet on the road: Cetil made an
assault upon him, but there was this difference between them, that
Godmund got the upper hand and stabbed out his eye. And after this
Cetil wished to set a suit on foot against him for this, but then
there came certain men forward to quash the suit, and his discredit
was increased thereby. But afterwards, when Godmund was moneyless and
dependent on others, Cetil asked him to his house, and kept him as long
as he lived. And after this everything turned to Cetil's honour, and in
the end he was chosen bishop. Such reward did he get for his goodness.

Hann vas faðer Goðmundar es augat stack ór Katle byskope. En svá
barzc at því, at óviner Goðmundar báro þat í eyro Katle þá es hann
bió á Moðro-vollom, at hann fiplaðe kono hans [Gró] dóttor Gizorar
byskops. Ok fundosc á fornom vege, ok veiter Ketell hónom tilræðe; ok
varð þó sá munr, at Goðmundr varð oefre ok stack ór hónom augat. Ok
síðan vilde Ketill framm foera mál á hendr hónom, en síðan urðo
nockorer til at lemja þat niðr, ok ióksc af því ó-virðing. En síðan
(es) Goðmundr varð fé-lauss ok þurfte annarra, þá bauð Ketill hónom
til sín, ok veitte hónom meðan hann lifðe: ok snoeresc Katle síðan
hverr hlutr til sóma, en at lykðom vas hann til byskops kærenn. Ok
gafsc hónom svá sítt góð-ræðe.--Liosvetn. Saga (end).





The Election of Bishop Godmund of Holar.


[This translation is made according to the full text as it is found in
Cd. Resen. AM. 399, and AM. 657, and printed in Biskopa Sogor (1858),
pp. 471 sqq., here marked A. A somewhat abridged text is given in
the Sturlunga compilation, printed in Sturl. (1878) i. 116 sqq.,
here marked a in the notes, wherever A can be mended therefrom.]


The appointment of bishops in Iceland forms a curious chapter in Church
History which throws light on the general condition of the country. The
first two bishops were elected by the Whole Congregation at the
All-moot. Thus of Islaf, Hunger-waker says, 'He was begged to go abroad
[for consecration], and chosen to bishop by the whole commonweal of
Iceland.' And of Gizor it runs, 'Then the commonweal turned to Gizor,
and begged him to go abroad [for consecration].' And we find the phrase
'chosen to bishop at the Moot' and the 'bishop-choosing.' Again of
bishop John, the first Northern bishop, the creation of his diocese,
Holar, came of the prayer of the men of the Northern Quarter to Gizor
who granted it: 'And priest John Ogmund's son was afterwards chosen
to bishop by God and good men, and he went abroad with letters from
bishop Gizor,.... and he was hallowed bishop by Auzor archbishop of
Lund at Sconey.' After this things go on regularly till bishop Magnus,
Paul's successor in Scalholt, and Godmund of Holar both died, in 1237;
upon which the two bishops-elect were vetoed in Norway in 1238.

The Scalholt bishop was regularly chosen by the three Quarters--East,
West, and South--at the All-moot, and the Holar bishop by the
Northlanders at their meeting held for this purpose at Withe-mire. The
recommendation of the last bishop, the consent, at least, of the
Scalholt bishop in the case of Holar, the influence of the great
families in putting forward candidates, the election by 'the franklins
and abbots,' the veto of the archbishop,--all these characteristics
of this form of appointment are to be found in the Early Bishops'
Lives, and especially in the full account of Godmund's election.

The bishop's reign is always counted from his consecration, not
election. From the election to the consecration one winter at
least intervened; for in those days no instance is on record of a
man going abroad and coming back the same summer. In the meantime
the bishop-elect bore the name of 'byscops-emne'--a word formed
on an Irish pattern. The election of the Scalholt bishop always
took place at the All-moot in the second half of June, and he went
abroad that same summer (as a rule). The consecration-day was usually
timed in the spring, so that the bishop could get back home the same
summer to Iceland. Twice, owing to the death of a bishop-elect, the
interregnum lasted four and four-and-a-half years respectively (from
Sept. 30, 1148, to Midsummer, 1152; and again from Nov. 29, 1211,
to Midsummer, 1216). To go abroad was, in that age of navigation,
no child's play. Two bishops-elect, Hall and Tait, died; hence,
and no doubt to the advantage of the early Church, the men chosen
used to be young or in the prime of life; the youngest is Thorlac
I (age 32), Magnus I (age 36); turned 50 (as far as we know) was
only John (age 52). Cetil would have been close on 50; Hall, too,
must in 1149, his year of election, have been a man bordering on 50,
though perhaps not yet on the wrong side of it, for his father died
in 1111; and he himself played a part in the famed All-moot of 1121 as
franklin of Hawk-dale, and his son Gizor was born not later than 1125
(p. 598). The Hawk-dale men were a long-lived race, yet the journey
abroad proved too much for Hall, and cost him his life. Else the age
of the bishops-elect verges nearer 40 than 50.

After 1238, throughout the rest of the 13th and the whole of the 14th
century, the election rests in the hands of the chapter of Niths-oyce
[Nidaros] (part of the general policy of surrendering power to gain
peace and end the civil wars), and the characteristics of an election
at this period are to be found in the Life of Bishop Lawrence,
printed in Biskopa Sogor, vol. i.

After 1413, throughout the 15th century, Iceland was again left
to itself, it would seem. We barely know the bishops' names. What
influence from outside there was, was English rather than Norwegian,
but direct records are wanting. Early in the 16th century the election
of John Are's son, in 1522, was delegated by the chapter to the synod
of priests in Iceland: so bishop Ogmund of Scalholt, in his old age
and blindness (1536), got the synod to elect his sister's son Sigmund
Paul's son as suffragan bishop. Sigmund went abroad for consecration,
was taken ill on the consecration-day, and died in Norway nineteen
days later (1537). This Sigmund was the grandfather (mother's father)
of John Egilsson the annalist (p. 422). Ogmund then (1539) gets his
protégé, Gizor, elected by the synod in the same way. He went abroad to
Denmark and was consecrated. His subsequent history was not creditable,
his unhandsome behaviour to his benefactor being a grievous blot on
his memory. Gizor was the first Protestant bishop. As 1238 ushered
in Norse rule, so 1539 is another tide-mark in Icelandic history,
ushering in the rule of King and Church of Denmark.

The next bishop, Martin the Painter, was chosen by the king, because no
Icelandic synod would have chosen a Lutheran. But when once Lutheranism
had gotten a hold on the whole country the old usage is recurred to,
and we find Odd (1588), his son Gisle (1631), and Bryniulf (1638),
bishops of Scalholt, all chosen in synod at the All-moot. The case
of Gudbrand of Holar (1570) is too near to the Reformation to be a
precedent, but his daughter's son and successor to the see of Holar,
the literary bishop Thorlac Sculeson, was chosen (1628) in synod at
Fly-mire; his son and successor Gisle was elected (1656) in the same
way at the same place [1792].

These were the last bishops in whose election the voice of Church
and people was consulted. After Absolute Government was established
in Denmark in 1660, the Danish king chose bishops for Iceland as for
all other parts of his dominions.

With regard to consecration, as there was no archbishop nor even
the full number of bishops in Iceland for regular consecration,
the bishops-elect had to go abroad for that ceremony to the next
archbishop. Islaf and Gizor went to the metropolitan at Bremen (Gizor
to Magdeburg), but John of Holar, and all the bishops of both sees down
to Beorn and Clong inclusive, were consecrated by the new metropolitan
at Lund. After 1152 there was a metropolitan see raised in Throndham
at Niths-oyce [Nidaros]. Accordingly Brand of Holar and S. Thorlac of
Scalholt, and all their successors (with the sole exception of Paul,
and for special reasons), down to the end of the 14th century, were
consecrated at Nidaros. There is no record further, but in the 15th
century there are English names in the list, and we should scarcely
be surprised to find that some at least were consecrated at some
South-western or Eastern English see--of some it is even a moot point
whether they were consecrated at all. Others passed through England,
there being no direct communication.

As an illustration of the close connection with England: in 1520,
Ogmund bishop-elect, going abroad to Norway to consecration, is obliged
to take an English ship, and touches first at Harwich, whence we have
epistles of his. From here he proceeds to Norway. On his way back
after consecration and a visit to Denmark, he stayed in Shetland and
bishopped children there at Whitsuntide (the last instance of Norse
Church influence in these islands). Thence he sailed for Iceland,
and after drifting to Greenland, which was then desolate, he reached
Iceland in 1522. Gizor (1539), with all following to the present day,
was consecrated in Denmark.

Bishops of Icelandic sees were always consecrated on Sunday. We know
the day of consecration of at least a score, and of all the early ones,
save Magnus Gizor's son. Of the Norwegian bishops' consecration we have
only two dates left, because they happened to be consecrated on the
same day as an Icelandic bishop. The accuracy of the chronology, and
the way in which it has been handed down with but few scribal mistakes,
witness to the historical value of the details of the Bishops' Lives.

We know curiously very little about the religious establishments of
Iceland. The list given in the Appendix to the Sturlunga, ii. p. 504,
gives most of the known facts. There is no Life left of any abbot or
monk. The only glimpse of regular life comes from the Bishops' Lives,
especially the account of Thorlac's house of Canons Regular, and the
story of Lawrence's earlier life. It is rather remarkable, too, that
there were no establishments of friars in Iceland, though John the
Norwegian (the story-teller, to whom we owe the story of archbishop
Absalon, Reader, p. 234), Lawrence's fellow-bishop, was a Dominican.

Bishop Arne (d. 1298) is the last bishop of Scalholt of whom we have
a biography. Before him there are biographies of the first seven
bishops, the 'prince-bishops' of his see, Scalholt. Of the bishops
of Holar we have biographies of the first, John; the fifth, Godmund;
and, after a long interval, of Lawrence (the last biography of all,
d. 1331)--three most distinguished men of very different characters.


Bremen (and Magdeburg):--


    Islaf (Scalholt): elected 1054 (?). Consecrated Whit-Sunday,
    26 May, 1056; back to Iceland the same summer. Died 5 July, 1080.

    Gizor (Sc.): elected at the Moot, June, 1081; goes abroad the
    same summer. Consecrated Sunday, 4 Sept., 1082; back to Iceland
    the summer of 1083 [1793]. Died 28 May, 1118.


Lund:--


    S. John (Holar): elected 1105. Consecrated Sunday (Rogate),
    29 April, 1106; back in the summer. Died 23 April, 1121.

    Thorlac I (Sc.): elected at the Moot, 1117; goes abroad the same
    summer. Consecrated Sunday (Misericord.), 28 April, 1118; goes
    back the same summer. Died 1 Febr., 1133.

    Cetil (Hol.): elected at the Moot, June, 1121; goes abroad the
    same summer. Consecrated 1st Sunday in Lent, 12 Febr., 1122;
    back the following summer. Died 7 July, 1145.

    Magnus I (Sc.): elected at the Moot, 1133; puts to sea,
    driven back by counter winds; starts for good in the summer of
    1134. Consecrated Sunday, 28 Oct., 1134; back in the summer of
    1135. Died 30 Sept., 1148.

    Biorn (Hol.): elected 1146, and goes abroad. Consecrated Sunday
    (Misericord.), 4 May, 1147; comes back the same summer. Died 20
    Oct., 1162.

    *Hall (Sc.): elected at the Moot, 1149; went abroad the same
    summer; died unconsecrated in Utrecht, 1150.

    Clong (Sc.): elected at the Moot, 1151; went abroad the same
    summer. Consecrated Sunday (Quasi modo Geniti), 6 April, 1152;
    back to Iceland the same summer. Died 28 Febr., 1176.


Nidaros:--


    Brand I (Hol.): elected in the summer, 1163; went abroad the same
    summer. Consecrated Sunday, 8 Sept., 1163; came back to Iceland
    in the summer of 1164. Died 6 Aug., 1201.

    S. Thorlac II (Sc.): elected as assistant-bishop at the Moot,
    1174; went abroad 1177. Consecrated Sunday, 2 July, 1178; came
    back to Iceland the same summer. Died 23 Dec, 1193.

    Paul (Sc.): elected at the Moot, 1194; went abroad the same
    summer. Consecrated (at Lund, Denmark) Sunday (Jubilate), 23 April,
    1195; came back the same summer. Died 29 Nov., 1211.

    Godmund (Hol.): elected at an autumn Moot at Wallds, 1 Sept.,
    1201; goes abroad 14 July, 1202. Consecrated Sunday (Quasi modo
    Geniti), 13 April, 1203. Died 16 April, 1237.

    *Tait (Sc): elected at the Moot, 1212; went abroad, 1213; died
    in Norway, 1214.

    Magnus II (Sc): elected at the Moot, 1215; went abroad the same
    summer. Consecrated (day unknown), 1216. Died 14 Aug., 1237.



The bishops of both dioceses having died in the same year, two
bishops-elect were now sent abroad--


    Magnus (Sc): and

    Kygri-Beorn (Hol.) [1794].


Both started for Norway, 1237-38--a year of evil memory; but now the
times were changed, both elections were cancelled in Norway, and two
Norwegians were consecrated (elected by the chapter in Nidaros it
seems), Botholf to Holar and Sigward for Scalholt. Both bishops-elect
(both men stricken in years) died soon after, Beorn in 1238 in Norway,
Magnus was drowned Sept. 20, 1240. They were the last popular elected
men in Iceland. The year 1238 sounded the death-knell of the old
Icelandic commonwealth. The Flatey-book entering sub anno gives
pithy utterance to this: 'The All-moot deserted, which was thought
portentous,' i.e. there was no Allthing held--an event unheard of
since the establishment of the commonwealth. The quarter-of-a-century
that remained was a time of anarchy.

Now Godmund the priest and his companions go forth from Swine-fell to
East-frith, and come to Staf-fell at Bartholomew-mass [Aug. 24]. There
he got tidings at matins--the death of bishop Brand. And he was as
dazed by these tidings as if he had been stunned by a stone. Then he
had a dumb mass [1795] sung at once for his soul, and the day after
all the offices for the soul and a dirge, with all care and love.

Afterwards they went forth until they came east into
Fleets-dale-hundred to Wal-theow's-stead to John Sigmund's son at
Giles-mass [Sept. 1]. It was the church-day there, and they were
welcomed. And when John brought Godmund the priest to church in the
evening, Godmund the priest asked him what tidings there were, but
John says, 'Both great and good. The men of the Hundred of Shaw-frith
are to hold a meeting to-morrow to choose a bishop, and thou shalt
be chosen, for God willeth it.' And from that time forward there was
such great terror in his breast that he could by no means comfortably
enjoy sleep or meat for the awe and dread of these words. There was
then in Fleets-dale-hundred Rand-weg, a woman that had been in a
trance, and she came to see Godmund the priest, and told him of her
vision with great terror and awe. In the evening before Cross-mass
[Sept. 13], Godmund the priest came to the place that is called Lithe
in Fleets-dale-hundred. There Godmund the priest dreamed that night
that he thought he came into the church at Wallds in Swarfad-dale,
and he thought the altar fell into his arms, and he thought he was
vested in the fairest vestments. And that proved true, for in the
evening they go north over the heath to Weapon-frith, and came in the
evening to Cross-wick. And when they were come to table, there came
messengers of Colban, Tume's son [the ruling chief in the north],
Einar Fork [at their head], and they walked in and up to Godmund the
priest and greeted him well, and he took their greeting well. Then
he asked them for tidings. Says Einar, 'We tell thee good tidings;
thou art chosen bishop by Colban and all the men of the hundred and
the abbots, and I bring thee now their letter and message, that thou
shouldst come hence to the north as quickly as may be.' But he was
so dumbfounded at these tidings that he could not speak for a long
while. And when he began to speak he prayed God to keep him, and let
that fall out which should be best for all. The day after Godmund
the priest goes forth to Temple to Tait Odd's son. There was then
on a visit with him Hall-dor the priest. Then Godmund the priest
takes counsel with Hall-dor the priest whether there was any hope
that he would release him from this charge and take it up himself,
but he refused, saying that he was old and not fit for it withal,
and he said he could see that it would be no use for him to refuse,
and he said that it was God's will and men 'that thou be bishop,'
says Hall-dor, 'but I will convoy thee with my prayers and in all
that I can to help thee.'

Godmund the priest and his companions go forth thence northward to
Ax-frith over Madder-dale-heath. There came upon them a storm and
blinding snow, and their company was driven asunder until Godmund
the priest got his reckoning, and found that they were not on the
right path, and he and his three deacons--Sturla Bard's son, and
Lam-car Thor-gils' son [1796], and Thor-lac Thor-stan's son--were
the first to get to a house. Then long after came Snorre Bard's
son, and Grim Sholto's son, and Grim Gale, and last came John Ale's
[Onela's] son, and their baggage-man. Now they went on till they came
to Greniad-stead, where there dwelt Eyjolf Hall's son the priest. Then
Godmund the priest called upon Eyjolf Hall's son the priest, to tell
him whether he would consent to be bishop. But priest Eyjolf told him
this, that he knew for certain that there was no use talking of that
[for he said that the men of Shaw-frith and Ey-frith would have none
but Godmund for bishop] [1797].

Now they go from the north and come to Halse at Michaelmas [Sept. 29]
to Ogmund Thor-ward's son [Godmund's first cousin]. Ogmund asks
whether it were true that he refused to be bishop, and he said that
it was true. 'What means this?' said Ogmund; and Godmund the priest
says, 'Because it seems to me that there is great jeopardy therein
to have to deal with many men, both obstinate, and full of envy,
and mighty; and wouldst thou, my kinsman, be obedient to us if we
were to rebuke thy way of life?' But Ogmund says, 'Whose troubles
shouldst thou rather take upon thee than mine? and though I were
disobedient to thee, yet I would be more disobedient to any one else,
and no one else will dare to rebuke me, and it will not avail thee to
refuse; and it will go with thee as with bishop Ambrose [1798], thy
foster-father; the play of childhood foretold for thee as for him,
that thou should be a bishop. Now it was no use for him to refuse,
and so it will be with thee; and we will have no bishop but thee.'

Now Godmund the priest goes forth until he comes hence to Withe-mire at
the Winter-nights [c. Oct. 15]. All men were glad to see him--Colban
and Thor-ward [Godmund's uncle], and Gyrith [Godmund's cousin and
Colban's wife], and all the others. The Saturday after Thor-ward
Thor-gar's son fell to speech with Godmund the priest, they two
alone. He asked him whether it were true that he had made up his mind
to this, to refuse to be bishop, and not to listen to his judgment
or that of other wise men, friends and kinsmen and relations. And
he said that it was true. [Says Thor-ward], 'I think I have a
right to judge for thee and to be thy guardian, and I will have my
way.' Then answers Godmund the priest, 'Why should that be, that I
should not have my way in my own matter?' Thor-ward answers, 'Know
thou this, kinsman, that I have always been a chief over our kindred,
and my father before me. And thy father and also all my kinsmen were
therefore wont to listen to my advice, and I give thee this counsel,
for thou shalt be the chief after me.' Then says Godmund the priest,
'Thou didst not offer me my father's heritage, and little honour hast
thou sought for me hitherto, save to beat me to my book; and so now
also meseems thou wilt put me into jeopardy, and not into honour,
and I will not consent to this.' Says Thor-ward, 'What! Have I heard
such a thing indeed? Thou putting away thine own honour and ours; but
it shall not avail thee, for thou shalt be bishop as I have dreamed
thou would.' 'What hast thou dreamed?' saith Godmund the priest, and
Thor-ward says, 'I dreamed this, that I went into a house so great
and high, that I had never seen one so great and high, and there were
big doors there too, that were of no less measurement. But when my
head came to the door it caught my shoulders, so that I could not
get further. Now I have read this dream thus: that thy honour [1799]
must be so big that all Christendom or the Church could not compare
a greater, and this house must be liken the Church. And dreams are
in common between us. Then I dreamed another dream. Methought I came
north to Thrond-ham, and into the hall of king Olaf. Methought he was
sitting in his high-seat, and the hall was all decked. Methought he
stood up to meet me, and stretched out his arms and greeted me. "A
hale and blessed welcome to thee, Thor-ward, thou shalt be blessed
over all the lands of the North." Now I know thou hast part in this
dream, and thou shalt go abroad, and become bishop, and thou shalt
be hallowed in Olaf's church at Thrond-ham. Now it shall not avail
thee to speak against this, for it shall come about whether thou will
or not.' Then they broke off the talk, and Thor-ward told Colban all
their talk on both sides.

After that Colban goes to meet Godmund the priest, and he tells him
that they had held a meeting at Wallds at Giles-mass. 'And there were
at the meeting the abbots of Thing-eyre and of Thwart-water. There
were Gizor Hall's son, and Godmund Deer, and many men of the Hundred,
and there were put up for election thou and Magnus Gizor's son. And
Gizor pleaded the case of his son Magnus, and said that there was
more support for him, and that he was more tried in the management
of an estate than thou. But I made as if I liked whichever should
be chosen; and then answered Healm As-beorn's son and Hafer [yeomen
both] and many others, that they did not care so much for men out
of the Quarter as to have a man chosen out of the other Quarters,
and they all were of one mind on this, so that there was no one to
speak against it, and so they all agreed, and now thou art firmly
chosen both by God and man. And we trust that thou wilt do both God's
will and ours.' Then Godmund the priest answers, 'I will first hear
whether the other men of the Hundred are of the same mind as thee,
for methinks much lies upon it, and a great charge it is, and I am
therefore slow to undertake it.'

Then a meeting was called on the Lord's-day at Withe-mire, and thither
came the men of the Hundred and took the matter into consideration
anew, and it came to the same conclusion that they were all again
agreed. These men sent to the church after Godmund the priest,
and he came in, and Colban told him that they prayed him for his
consent and agreement to undertake this charge that they asked him to
take and be bishop. But when Godmund the priest saw how the matter
stood with Colban, that he would have nothing but that, and that he
thought it would be better for himself, then Godmund the priest said,
'I will rather trust myself with God's grace to consent to this charge,
than take the risk on me of no one being chosen.' Then Colban answered,
'Thou speakest most blessedly,' says he; and they all thanked him anew,
and now for the second time the election was confirmed, and men went
home that night.

But that evening there was a high-seat prepared for him, and Colban
himself bore in the meat before him, and spread a cloth on the table
before him. But as there was little time for it, the cloth was rent,
and Colban spoke about it. 'Thou canst see now that we treat thee
rather with familiarity than according to thy deserts, since there
is such a shabby cloth under thy plate.' But he answered smiling,
'No matter for the cloth, but it will go so with my bishopric; it shall
be rent like this cloth.' But Colban held his peace and answered not.

In the morning after they made ready to go to Holar with the
bishop-elect, Colban and Thor-ward and his own clerks. Colban gave
him a full-grown ox in the morning before they went forth, saying
that this should be the first of gifts between them. They went forth
late that day, and came out to Holar the even before the mass of the
Maids of Cologne [Oct. 21], and there was made a procession to meet
him. And when they were come there Colban took upon him the whole
governance of the stewardship and possessions of the homestead, and
asked no leave of the bishop-elect. Cygre-Beorn was at Holar before;
and before they came to Holar, Lamcar the deacon of the bishop-elect
did all Colban's writing-work as long as he was at home, but as soon
as they came to Holar, Lamcar was kept out of all letter-writing and
Cygre-Beorn was taken for letter-writing in his place. And Colban
began at once to take Beorn into his friendship more than any other
man, and Beorn at once began to take a hatred for the bishop-elect
out of envy, because he thought he was held in too little account by
him. And this was a sign of what was to come of Beorn, for his envy
grew greater and more manifold, and he was filled with the devilish
seed of the enemy of all mankind without ceasing, and it grew greater
the longer it dwelt in him.

Now it is told so, that as the winter went over Colban alone had
governance of all there, and the bishop-elect was so overborne that
he could not bring it about that his brother's sons should be there,
but he made them a homestead at Calf-stead out of the money that
had been given him in the summer; but Colban made so free as to
establish himself at the bishop's stead with six men beside. Moreover
the bishop-elect wished that the poor should be given a meal thrice a
day, but Colban drove them into the guest-house and had them given one
meal. But when Yule was passed away, Thorarin the Despenser came on the
eve of the Epiphany to talk with the bishop-elect, and spake to him,
'Thou art not curious as to the state of the household which we have
in hand.' The bishop-elect answers, 'Methinks it is the worst thing
to meddle without having might' 'Nevertheless I wish to tell thee,'
says Thor-arin, 'how matters stand. I fixed so much food to last for
the Yule-feast this winter, as hath long been used to be found, and
every week what hath been cooked hath run short at the end of Yule,
but now it hath lasted a week longer, and yet there hath never been
such a multitude here at Yule as now.' Then answered the bishop-elect,
'It must be, my son, that Mary loveth hospitality more than Colban
doth.' Colban sat by and held his peace, and answered not. Then the
despenser went away, and the neatherd came up at once in the same
hour and told him the same story about the fodder for the cattle
which he had in his hands, that it had never lasted as long before
as it had now. And the bishop-elect answered the same, 'Who knoweth,
but Mary loveth hospitality better than Colban doth?'

But after Yule the bishop-elect sent Thord Wermund's son east to Eyre
to summon Raven to meet him at Mid-frith at Sexagesima, for he wished
to ask him to go abroad with him. But when it came to the time that
was fixed, the bishop-elect made ready to depart from home. And when he
was come to his horse or cart Colban went up to him and spake to him:
'Now I wish that we should lay down our differences that have been
between us this winter, for there hath been no cause for it, and let
us make no account of it either of us.' The bishop-elect answered,
'I do not think that I have been at fault, and it would be well if
thou hadst done no ill, but thou hast taken the risk if thou have
done otherwise.' Colban answers, 'We may both have had something to
do in it, as is mostly the case, but it is likely that I have had
most to do with it, and I wish to ask thy forgiveness, and I wish to
forgive thee, if thou have in any way taken too much on thyself.' The
bishop-elect answered, 'Good words are good, and every man is blind
in his own case, but I protest that I have not taken too much upon
me this winter, because I have never had the choice given me.'

Then he went west into the country and took guest-quarters at
Thing-eyre. There was a good nun there. She was an anchoress, and a
woman of good understanding. Her name was Wolfrun. She was the mother
of priest Simon the Tall. She kept so straitly to her solitude that
she would not have her son come to her, or see him when he came
to see her. She told the bishop-elect that Mary had shown her in
a vision that God and She wished him to be bishop. 'And thou shalt
not refuse, if thou wilt follow God's will: as thou wilt surely do,
for it is so laid down for thee.' This account he thought markworthy,
and he put faith in it.

Now the bishop-elect went forth thence till he came to Stead-bank in
Mid-frith at the day named. That same evening Raven Swainbeorn's son
came thither from the west out of the Friths as was appointed. Then the
bishop-elect spake a long and markworthy discourse on the Lord's-day,
and declared that if any man were come there, or were aware of any
man that would be willing to take up the charge that was put upon him,
or would challenge him therefore, he said that he would gladly give it
up if he might do so by common consent. But no man that was come there
dared to be the challenger. And at that meeting the going abroad of
Raven Swainbeorn's son with the bishop-elect was settled. From this
meeting Raven Swainbeorn's son went home westward to Eyre, and the
bishop-elect north to Holar with his company.

That winter the bishop-elect had sent men with a letter east to
Swine-fell to Sigurd Orm's son and Thurid, which said thus: 'God's
greeting and his sendeth Godmund, that is now called bishop-elect,
to Sigurd and Thurid. God hath shown great tokens [of His bounty]
upon us, so that we are able to fulfil our promise, as we are in duty
bound toward you, to give you an establishment. Now I am in need of
your help since I have taken upon me a greater charge than I am able
to bear. Now I offer you both to be stewards to me and look after my
property. And do ye come as soon as ye may, for that will be to the
gain of the bishopstead and of me and of us all. Valete.'

Now when the word of the bishop-elect came to Sigurd he made ready and
went forth from the east after Yule, and met the bishop-elect as he was
going home north, and Sigurd went north to Holar before him. But when
the bishop-elect came home it was taken into consideration what choice
Sigurd should have, for he said that he would not take it up unless
the stewardship and the property of the see were handselled to him,
but the bishop-elect was slow to handsel him the place. These wise
men, Colban Tume's son, Hafr Brand's son, and many others, prayed the
bishop-elect rather to handsel Sigurd the place than to reject such
a man as Sigurd, and they all thought that he could not do better for
the stewardship than to give it into the hands of Sigurd and Thurid,
and the end of their counsel was that he handselled Sigurd the whole
stewardship for him. Then Sigurd went home east with a letter of
the bishop-elect to bishop Paul in Scal-holt, saying thus: 'God's
greeting and his sendeth Godmund that is now called bishop-elect. We
have consented to take up a greater burden than we are able to bear,
and have not got your leave, as is meet. Now we wish to ask you to look
into this matter on God's behalf, as ye are well able to do, and say
what course ye choose. If ye will choose another man to this office
and charge which we have unworthily taken up, then I will gladly give
it up and depart, inasmuch as I am aware of some men that they think
they have gone too far in the matter. But I have appointed Sigurd
Orm's son as my steward, because men misdoubt my stewardship. Now
do ye quickly choose one way or another, as God shall teach you,
and send me a letter as soon as may be, whether ye choose me or not.'

But when Sigurd came to Scalholt and gave bishop Paul the letter
of the bishop-elect, then bishop Paul sent a letter east to Odd to
Sæmund. 'God's greeting and his sendeth bishop Paul to Sæmund his
brother.--A letter of Godmund the bishop-elect is come to me that
I should choose another man to bishop if I will, and he says he is
ready to give up the election. He hath also appointed Sigurd Orm's son
steward for him, because men rather dreaded that his own management
of the estate would not be prudent. I think also I can perceive this
in his letter, that he must mean to go abroad in the summer, if he be
elected, because he prayeth me to do one thing or the other quickly,
elect him or no. Now I will that thou tell me what I shall say to him.'

Sæmund sent a letter in answer to bishop Paul which speaketh so:
'To bishop Paul God's greeting and his own sendeth Sæmund his
brother.--Know thou, brother, that Godmund bishop-elect hath been
no great friend in our dealings with Sigurd, but yet he is much
praised by many men, and it is likely since the choice hath fallen
on him that it must be God's will. I also hear that he must be very
well fit therefore in many ways, both by reason of his charity and
good conversation and purity of life, which is of most account. But
if there be anything else therein, do thou take no burden off the
North-land-men, but let them answer for their choice themselves. This
is my counsel, that thou choose him rather than not; for it is not
certain who will be better pleasing to God than he, and it is best to
risk it. It is uncertain that he shall be found whom none can find
fault with. The North-land-men were self-willed in their choice,
and now let them bear the risk whatever it be.'

Now when the letter came to Scalholt the bishop sent word to Thor-wald
Gizor's son, and to Magnus his brother, and to Sigurd, and they
appointed a meeting, and the bishop declared to them that the election
was put to him, that he made up his mind to choose Godmund to bishop
and was counselled before. They all bind themselves together with
a covenant, and bishop Paul and Sigurd, and those with him, send
Ingimund Grim's son with a letter to the bishop-elect. The letter
spake thus: 'Bishop Paul sendeth God's greeting and his to Godmund
bishop-elect.--God hath chosen thee to bishop by God's laws and
men's, as may most fully be done in our land. Now as God and good
men have laid this charge upon thee, there is need that we should
see thee as soon as may be, for we perceive this in thy letter, that
thou art minded to go abroad in the summer, if it go so as thou art
minded. Now I will come and meet thee wherever thou wilt, but I will
give thee thanks and gratitude if thou wilt come to see me at home,
though I do not oblige thee to this, for I have many needful errands
to the archbishop, wherefore I would have thee come and see me before
thou go abroad.'

Now the winter passes away, and after Whit-days [c. June 6, 1202]
the bishop-elect went south to Scalholt to meet bishop Paul. Godmund
the bishop-elect took with him the letters that he had sent to the
archbishop. Then he went home to Holar. Then Sigurd also came from the
east with Thurid to Holar for good, and he put it to the bishop that
their property should be invested there, and they set the amount at
ten hundred hundreds that was in all kinds of property, both money
and kind, and he was obliged to consent thereto. Afterwards he was
made ready to go abroad by means of the tithe. Godmund bishop-elect
was one winter old of the fifth teen [age 41] when he went abroad to
be hallowed bishop....

But when the bishop-elect came abroad, Raven Swainbeorn's son came
abroad from the west, and he was then ready to go with him as they
had appointed. They settled to take with them fifteen Icelandish
men. These were Raven Swainbeorn's son, Thomas Thorarin's son, and
Iwar John's son, Grim the Monk the son of Healte, Erlend the priest,
Berg Gundstan's son, and Eyjolf Snorre's son, and Thorstan Cambe's son,
Godmund Thormod's son the priest, Brand Dalc's son, Peter Bard's son,
and Snorre his brother, Thord Wermund's son, and Hosculd Are's son,
Colswain Beam's son. They put out the Lord's-day [July 14, 1202]
before the Divisio Apostolorum. The bishop-elect had sent from the
ship north up the frith Colswain to get water-casks, and he came
from the north down to the frith when the ship was sailing out, and
became a strand-gaper. Just at the moment there came men rowing in
their shirts. It was Narve of Brink, and they were come with their
catch of fish from the east out of Flatey. Now Colswain tells them
his trouble, and calls on them for help. 'Thou art in a bad plight,'
says Narve, 'but since it is both a need of thine and the bishop-elect,
I will certainly do thy will.' They cast their catch out of the boat
at once and took in Colswain and his baggage, and rowed under sail
down the frith. Then the wind began to blow, and the ship was getting
away. When they saw that the two vessels were falling farther apart,
Narve said, 'How far are we to follow after the merchantman before
thou hold us free from reproach in the pursuit as far as depends upon
us?' Colswain answers, 'Out in the chops of the frith, where the sea
meets it.' 'All right,' says Narve, 'and so it shall be.' But when the
merchantman came out as far as Hrisey, then the bishop-elect spoke:
'Now let fall the sail; I will not sail away from my man that is
ashore. Moreover I will have mass to-day on the island.' The Eastmen
[Norwegians] spoke against it, and it was against the will of them
all to lose so fair a wind. But he said that it would be bad luck,
'and God will let a still greater delay fall on our journey.' But
when they saw that he misliked it, the sail was let fall and the
anchor let go, and the bishop-elect went ashore to sing mass. Now
Narve and his men need not row any longer. Colswain got on board,
and in the morning when the wind was fair, and they wished to bring
their anchor home, it was fast, and one after another went to the job,
and tried everything that came into their mind. Then the bishop-elect
was told of it, and he went up to it, and said, 'My Lord, do thou
loose the anchor!' and took hold of the rope. With that the anchor
came loose at once, and they betook them to their sail, and sailed
to Grimsey. They lay there a week. Then there came up a fair wind,
and they sailed north of Gnup. Then came a head-wind, and drove them
quite west of Shaw-frith. Then they ceased drifting, and they ratched
again a second time north of Lang-ness. Then came a land-wind and
set them adrift, and drove them west into the deep. Then one night a
woman on board had a dream. She thought she saw a big and a glorious
man come aboard their ship to the bishop's berth, and walk down the
ship until he came there where the bishop-elect was resting, and
blessed him. She thought it was bishop John, and afterwards she awoke.

The morning after the bishop-elect said, 'It is my counsel to set
sail and sail round the land west about, for the north-east winds keep
blowing, and we cannot go round the land north about.' This counsel was
taken to haul up the sail and sail round the land west about, and so by
West-frith, and south of Snae-fells-ness, and east by Eyia-fell. Then
the north-east winds kept blowing and drove them south right out to sea
until they were ware of the Sudreys, and could make out that they were
come to the islands that are called Hir-tir [S. Kilda]. Then they bore
south on the main by Ireland. Then they sailed south of Ireland and
had stormy weather, and could hear the roar of the surf on all sides
about them. Then the bishop-elect gave counsel that all men aboard
should go to shrift, and the clerks should all shave their tonsures,
and men should make vows. It was done as he bade. They promised to
give an ell out of every sack, and send a man to Rome and give half a
mark of wax every man to churches. Then straightway the storm fell,
and they got a fair wind to Norway, and the bishop-elect found king
Hacon in Bergen, and he received him very well. The bishop-elect went
north to Niths-oyce, and archbishop Eiric hallowed him to bishop.


The Log according to Raven's Saga.

[Another log-book of the voyage is given in Raven's Saga, which we
subjoin. For the text, see Sturl. ii. p. 290. A comment on the two
logs is given in a letter of the late Captain Thomas, of the Royal
Survey, in Icelandic Sagas, Rolls' Series, vol. i. p. xxxvii.]



On this voyage there were with Raven Thomas Thorarin's son, and second
Thord Wermund's son, and third Eyjolf Snorre's son. The bishop-elect
was glad to see Raven and his mates. And when the ship was fitted
out and the wind was fair they put to sea. They hardly got a fair
wind through the summer, and were long at sea. They were driven
south into the deep, so that they got [to sea] past off Ireland,
and later they were borne towards Scotland, and they lay some nights
off a place called Stair. Down from Scotland they got such a mighty
wind from the south that the men that had been there said that they
had never come into such a high sea as that they sailed in down from
Wharf in Scotland. Grim Healte's son spoke this verse:--


    The foaming wave wades along beneath us off Wharf [C. Wrath].
    It blows keen out of the south, the strong billows grow great. This
    is no slight toil.
    The keel springs, and the spray comes driven into men's berths.
    Now the sea-mountains are swollen. She keeps on south most proudly.


They were come into a hard gale that drifted them. And in the night the
men that kept watch and were awake heard a great crashing and an awful
thundering sound. They espied so big a wave that they thought their
death was certain if it came on the side of their ship. The shipmen,
Bot-olf and the others, set sail, saying that that was the only chance
of life if they could put her about first with the sail hoisted. Raven
said the breaker was too near for them to bring it off. He bade them
go to the bishop-elect and tell him what a plight they were in. The
bishop-elect stood up at once and took the halidom and went out to
the bulwark and blessed [the sea]. Then the ship turned head on to
the breaker. And when they were in the break of the wave it broke
everywhere as far as they could see save at their bows; nevertheless
the water came in on both quarters and carried away the sun-board
[upper bulwarks], and drove all the hammocks [skin bags] back into
the bilge. The shipmen had all one saying in their mouth. 'It went
better than was to be looked for,' they said. But the bishop-elect
thanked God and said that it went as it was like to. Then they set
sail, and had such a great gale that they sailed with one reef. And
at nightfall one day they saw land, and were got so near [shore] that
there were breakers on either quarter. They knew that they were come to
the Sudreys, and there was no man that knew how to pilot them, and most
men thought that the ship would be wrecked and those on board perish.

But when they were come into so great peril they got no counsel of
the shipmen. Then the bishop-elect spake and bade Raven take the helm,
saying that his good luck would be of great help to them and his good
information. Raven answers, 'The master's word is law,' and bade the
bishop-elect give him his blessing, and said he would take the thing
in hand trusting in God and him. The shipmen called him a dare-devil
to take such a charge in his hands, though he owned nothing of the
ship if it should not turn out well. But Raven said that he would
not take this charge on him if any other man would pilot them. 'But
ye must see that it cannot go on as it is, and there is something
to be done in every danger.' But none of them offered to take the
charge. Then Raven took the piloting with the consent of all the
shipmen. Godmund the poet notes this:--


    They got into great peril, I ween, the sailors broke down in
    piloting,
    The worn-out crew had to take to the sail:
    It was black to see the breakers falling on every side about
    the quarters,
    Where the tarred sea-horse cleared the waves through the
    skerry-wall.


Now when they were come into so great peril Raven said that they
should sail for the islands, and he said he would pilot them the
best course he could. And so they did; they sailed through the night,
and he piloted them with great skill and luck. Thomas Thorarin's son
said that three times he could see nothing but land on their bows,
and they could not tell whether there were any sound or passage or
no. Godmund the poet notes this:--


    The poet on the sea-horse took to piloting through the night to
    the morning watch.
    Raven proved, I ween, of great profit to men:
    He got both saved, ship and men.
    The sail swelled, and the cold wave plashed.


It happened that they got through the islands just as they could see
the brow of day. Then Eyjolf the Old quoth this half verse:--


    East from the heritage of the Irish furious gales chased the
    sea-horse,
    Until the Lord of the Heavens gave a votive wind to the sailors.


Then Grim began to recite:--


    The clever Sudrey-lady is looking on our sailing, as the stars
    are sparkling:
    The thin seams are distressed now.


And next they came into a good haven off an island that is called
Sandey, and there the chapman raised a harbour-mark.

So says Grim:--


    Botolf has brought his swift ship to Sandey the brent;
    The wave was falling on the seams just now.
    He himself raised and did a useful work, a harbour-mark,
    The brisk comrade of lords, on behalf of the strong ship.


They lay off Sandey in an anchor-berth some nights. King Olaf was
then ruling over the Sudreys. There came a bailiff of the king to them
and collected the land-ounce from them, according as the laws of the
Sudreys run, and they reckoned that they ought to pay twenty hundreds
of wadmal, because there were twenty Icelandish men on board. They
would not pay because they understood that they would have to pay as
much again in Norway. After that Raven and the bishop-elect went ashore
and many with them to church, because the bishop-elect wished to hold
the services or hours. The king was come there, and he bade the bishop
to table [with him]. But when the bishop-elect wished to go away,
the king said that the bishop-elect must do him right [i.e. pay his
dues] or he said he would keep him there. But the bishop-elect refused
flatly. Raven said that it was to be looked for, but offered to give
it as a gift to the king or to do the king honour. But he said that
he would have what he ought. But when the shipmen were aware of this,
that the bishop-elect and Raven were kept, then Botolf bade men take
their weapons, saying he would not desert such brave fellows without
knowing what was become of them. And when they were ready they leaped
into the boat and rowed to land, and went ashore in a ranked company;
but the Sudrey-men were sitting under a hillock, and the bishop-elect
and Raven with them. Then men made peace between them, and this was
the settlement in the end, that the bishop-elect and his men should
pay six hundreds of wadmal. After that they brought the bishop-elect
aboard again, and sailed with a fair wind and had a good passage,
and made Norway in their ship south of Throndham at a place called
Eid. There they learnt of the death of king Swerre. They lay there
through the night. Thence they sailed north to Throndham, and brought
their ship to Nith's-oyce. Then Grim quoth this verse:--


    Here we come to the harbour-mark on board the vessel,
    With Godmund the bishop-elect.
    We learnt one night before off Eid of the fall of lord Swerre,
    The king's men will not be in a merry mood.


They were in Norway through the winter, and there were many meetings
held. And the bishop-elect excused himself much, and declared that he
was but little fit for this office. There are many tales to be told
[that happened] ere Godmund was hallowed, but by the means of Raven
and other good men he was hallowed bishop by archbishop Eiric on the
mass-day of the holy virgin Euphemia [April 13, 1203]. Hacon Swerre's
son was then king over Norway.





CHAPTER 8

§ 8. LAW ECCLESIASTIC.

There is a Title of Icelandic Church Law or Law Christian among the
other Titles in the Corpus Iuris known as Grágás, which is there
described as a body of rules or constitutions made 'by bishops
Cetil and Thorlac by the counsel of archbishop Auzor and of Sæmund
[the historian], and many other clerks.' It was taken as law by the
All-moot c. 1125 (see Introduction to Libellus), and it was treated
precisely like other Titles as part of the Statute Law of the land.

That part of this Title which touches old custom or Constitutional Law,
or peculiar early Church usage, or is otherwise of individual interest,
is translated here from Codex Regius, the oldest extant MS. [Finsen,
K, §§ 1-19.]

Another Title, the Tithe Law, passed by the exertions of Gizor and
the chief men of Iceland c. 1096, is of value for comparison with
the English Law on the subject. [Finsen, K, §§ 255-260.]

Bishop Gizor was really the S. Olave of Iceland, the organizer of
the Establishment and Diocesan Church; he found the Church dependent
on private charity, and left it fixed on legal ground, whether for
better or worse we have not to judge here. Like the Law Christian,
it is printed from Codex Regius.

A few extracts from the Law of Rape-parting are also given. [Finsen,
K, §§ 234-35.] It seems to be of later date than the other two.

The text of Codex Regius used is, as before, Mr. Counsellor Finsen's
edition.

The Christian or Church Law.

This is the beginning of our laws, that all men shall be Christian here
in this country, and believe in one God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.



Of Baptism. Every child shall go to baptism when it is born, as soon
as may be, however shapen it may be. If the child's next-of-kin be
by there, he shall take the child to the baptism or the man whom he
asketh so to do....

The franklin is bound to feed the men that bear a child to baptism,
three men of full age and the child the fourth, and their horses or
beasts of draught if they have them with them. If he have less money
than so as to be bound to pay Moot-fare-pay, then he is bound to give
them house-room and sell them meat and hay, at the rate the neighbours
fixed. He shall be paid within fourteen nights the worth of the meat
and hay. If the franklin deny them harbour or this provision that
hath now been spoken of, he shall pay an outlaw-fine of three marks,
and he hath the pursual that is denied harbour....

If sickness be on the child, then he shall be baptized with the first
water that can be found....

If a child die prime-signed and have not been baptized, then he
shall be buried outside the churchyard where the hallowed earth and
unhallowed earth meet, and no corpse-service be sung thereover....

Every man that hath understanding thereto, man or woman, is bound to
learn the Pater Noster and Credo in Dominum. If he will not learn
them and hath his wits he shall pay a life-ring-garth [fine], and
the bishop shall settle as to the pursual who shall have it.



Burial. Every corpse which is entitled to the church shall be borne
to the church as soon as men are ready so to do....

To that church shall the body be borne at which the bishop allows
burial.

The franklin is bound to feed the man that bears the corpse to the
church and five men with him, and their horses or beasts of draught,
if they have them with them. If he deny them this, then he shall
pay an outlaw-fine of three marks, and he hath the pursual that is
denied harbour....

A corpse shall not be borne to church bare or bloody....

A corpse shall not be buried before it is cold. If a man bury a body
before it is cold, then he oweth a convict-fine therefore of three
marks, and he hath the pursual that will.

If men hurry the burial so that a quest declare that the breath was
in the man's breast when he was buried, then it is murder.

Graves shall all be an even price, whether they be near the church
or farther in the churchyard; twelve ells shall be the price of a
man's grave, save it be a toothless child, which shall be paid half
as dear. The priest shall have six ells for the corpse-service. He
shall pay the grave-price and the corpse-service-price that beareth
the body to the church. He shall pay it there at the church-stead,
where the body is buried, on the fifth day of the week, when there
are four weeks yet of the summer [c. May 10], there in the home-garth
before the men's door....

If a body be found on the fells where the water-shed divides the
desert, then he shall bear the corpse to the church that liveth next
to the waters in that hundred, nearest to where the waters spring,
if he have two house-carles beside himself [in his household]....

There be four bodies that shall not be buried in church. This is
one body, if a man die unbaptized. The second is an outlaw's body,
that is not to be maintained or helped on his way; he shall not be
buried at the church, save the bishop of the Quarter give leave;
but if the bishop give leave, then he shall be borne to church. This
is the third body that shall not be buried at church, if a man do
such a crime upon himself that he die thereof, if he have meant so
to do, save he repent afterwards and go to shrift with the priest,
and then he shall be buried at the church.... This is the fourth
body that shall not be buried at the church, if the bishop have
forbidden a man to be buried at the church, that body shall not have
a grave at the church, but shall be buried outside men's home-garth,
an arrow-shot beyond the bound, where neither is acre nor eng [mead],
and wherefrom no streams fall toward the bowster [homestead], and no
corpse-service shall be sung over it.



Of Churches. Every church shall stand in the same place that it
was consecrated in, if it be not for earth-slips, or water-floods
or fire, or great storms, or desolation of the hundred [district]
either for dales or outlying coasts; in such case it is lawful to
move the church if such things come to pass. It is lawful to move
the church if the bishop give leave.

If the church be taken up a month before winter [Sept. 10] or is
wrecked so that it be useless, then the bodies and bones shall be
carried thence before the next Winter Nights [mid-October]. The
bodies and bones shall be taken to the church at which the bishop
giveth leave for them to be buried....

If a church be burnt down or wrecked so that another must be built,
the church shall be built where the bishop will and as big as he will,
and the church called [dedicated] as he will. The landowner is bound
to have the church built on his land where whosoever [it was] first
built it. He shall so begin the building that it be built within the
next twelve months from the time that the church was so wrecked,
that the hours [services] might not be said. If he neglect this
[apodosis missing].

The landowner ought to endow the church, so that the bishop be willing
to consecrate the church on that account. Then the bishop shall go
to consecrate that church. The franklin that hath the land there is
bound to hold a church-day that same day every twelve months, his
household and guests that are there the night before, and all they
that pay tithe thither when the bishop wisheth them to keep their
church-day. Every one shall keep the church-day where the bishop
wisheth. Church-day shall be kept as holy as Pask-day [Easter-day],
and ... with other mass-days.

Every man shall pay half his lawful tithe to the church which the
bishop pointeth out, and the bishop shall divide the hundred [district]
to this intent, that wherever a man live he shall pay his tithe to
the church, whosoever it be that dwelleth on the land. He that shall
pay tithe shall pay it in the home-garth before the men's door, on
the church estate, the fifth day of the week [Thursday], when four
weeks of summer are gone [c. May 10]; he shall pay this fee either
in wadmal or peltry of ware or trade or in gold or burnt silver....

When a man endow a church, whether it be with land or cattle or
loose money, or whether it be in tithes of the bowsters [homesteads],
which the men of the hundred have to pay there, the man that hath the
patronage of the church must let make all this agreement on a scroll,
[setting down] what he hath given there in fee, or other men of the
district, to this church. This charter it is right to carry to the
Moot and give notice of at the Laws-hill or in the Laws-court, or at
the Spring-moot to which he that endoweth the church belongeth. He
shall have the scroll read, and give notice of the charter at home at
the church once every twelve months when men come in greatest numbers
to the service or hours....

The franklin that dwelleth on the church estate ought to carry fire to
the church and ring the bells, or the man that he calleth on so to do.

It is also right for the priest to carry fire to the church, and
light the candles and ring the bells, and for those so to do whom he
calleth upon.



Of Priests. It is right for a man to have a priestling taught for
his church; he shall make an agreement with the boy himself if he be
sixteen winters old, but if he be younger, then he shall make it with
his lawful guardian. This agreement ought to hold all the terms they
make between them. But if they make no other agreement, but a man take
a priestling for a church according to the words of the law, he shall
give him teaching and fostering, and let him be so chastised that it
be no dishonour to the boy or his kin, and treat him as if he were his
own child. But if the boy will not learn, and loathes his book, then
he shall set him to other tasks, and chastise him so that he do him no
ill nor disfigurement thereby, and treat him with every other kind of
sternness. But if he will turn to his book again, then he shall keep
him to it, until he have taken orders and is a priest. He that giveth
him teaching is also bound to get mass-clothes and books, which in the
bishop's judgment shall suffice for the full twelve months' services.

The priest shall go to the church to which he is consecrated, and sing
there every holiday, if there be no impediment, mass and matins and
evensong, and at Long-fast [Lent] and Yule-fast [Advent], and all the
Ember-days he shall publish or give notice at the Laws-hill or at the
Laws-court of his terms of engagement which were made with the priest.

He hath the right to make a protest at the Laws-hill if he will as
to the way he is kept.

If the priest fly the church that he was taught to, or go away so that
he will not do the hours, as hath been said, then he that receiveth him
becometh an outlaw, or that accepteth his services or communeth with
him. It is the same penalty to commune with him as with an outlaw,
when there hath been protest made from the Laws-hill: and it is a
Fifth-court matter or suit, and the suit shall be given notice of at
the Laws-hill, and he shall be brought home like other bad servants
of men.

A priest may free himself from a church by teaching another in his
stead whom the bishop shall think fully his equal; the bishop hath
jurisdiction therein....

And if a church priest die at the place where he was taught, and hath
left property behind him, the church shall have it, and the man that
was his patron 300 six-ounce ells. If he had more property, then his
kinsmen shall have it.

Of the Bishops. We shall have two bishops here in the land. One of
the bishops shall be at the seat [of the see] in Scalholt and the
other at Holar in Sholto-dale.

And he shall hold the circuit of the Northlanders' Quarter that is
in Sholto-dale once every twelve months.

And the bishop that is in Scalholt he shall hold the circuit of his
three Quarters one every summer--the East-frith-men's Quarter, and
the Wrang-river-men's Quarter, and the West-frith-men's Quarter.

The bishop is bound to go round the Quarters and to visit every lawful
Rape, so that men be able to see him, and to consecrate churches and
chantries and oratories, and bishop [confirm] children, and give men
shrift. When a bishop shall consecrate a church he ought to receive
twelve ounces, and this money the bishop giveth to the church which
he consecrated. When he shall consecrate a chantry or an oratory he
shall receive six ounces for each that he shall consecrate....

The priest ought to take to himself a lawful domicile at the
Flitting-days [end of May]. And it is right that they keep it
afterwards till the lawful Leet [c. 20 Aug.] when it is Lord's-day,
when, the Saturday before, there were eight weeks yet alive [left]
of the summer....

A priest must not sell his services....

A priest ought not to sing more masses than two.

A priest hath not to sing a night-mass save the first Yule-night. But
if he do otherwise he is finable, nor shall any mass be bought of him.

Priests ought to be obedient to the bishop and show him their books
and mass-clothes. The priest whom the bishop willeth shall sing the
mass, and not he whom he forbids to do so.

A priest must not go with gay dress which the bishop forbiddeth,
and he must cut off his moustaches and beard and shave his crown once
every month, and obey the bishop in all things. But if he will not keep
what the bishop ordereth he shall pay a convict-fine of three marks,
and the bishop hath the pursual, and he shall sue the suit at the
priests-court at the All-moot and name twelve priests to the court,
and set forth his suit before them, and the bishop shall himself bear
verdict in the case and two priests with him, and he shall sue this
suit without oath....

If bishops or priests come out thither to this land that are not
learned in the Latin tongue, whether they be Armenian or Greek,
it is right for men to listen to their service if they will, but
their services are not to be for fee, and no service shall be taken
from them.

If a man let the bishop that is not learned in Latin consecrate
a church or bishop children, then he shall pay a convict-fine of
three marks to the bishop that was here before, and he shall take
the consecration-fee, and he shall consecrate the church and bishop
the children as if it were not done before, though they have chaunted
over them, since they are not learned in the Latin tongue.



Of Heathendom. Men shall believe in one God and His saints, and
sacrifice to no heathen wights. A man doth sacrifice to heathen
wights if he sign his cattle to other than God or His saints. If a
man sacrifice to heathen wights, then he shall pay a life-ring-garth
[fine].

If a man work charms or spells or enchantment--he worketh enchantment
if he singeth or speaketh or maketh to be sung for himself or his
cattle--then he shall pay a life-ring-garth fine, and he shall be
summoned at home, and the suit pursued with a quest of twelve.

If a man worketh witchcraft he becometh an outlaw. That is witchcraft
if a man work by his words or enchantment sickness or death to beast
or man. This shall be pursued with a quest of twelve.

Men shall not use stones or charm it, to bind it on man or man's
beasts. If a man believe in a stone for his healing or the healing
of his cattle, he shall pay a life-ring-garth fine.

No man shall keep unborn cattle. If a man hath an unborn beast,
and letteth it go unmarked, so that he put more trust in it than he
doth in his other cattle, or worketh with back-spells of any kind,
he shall pay a life-ring-garth fine.

If a man go bear-sark's way [run amuck], he shall pay a life-ring-garth
fine, and all the men that stood by, if they do not hinder him. If
they stop him they are not any of them at all [bound to pay a penalty],
but if it come oftener he shall pay a life-ring-garth fine.



Of Holidays. We shall keep the Lord's-day every seventh [day], so
that there shall be no work done save that which I will now reckon....

We shall keep Saturday every seventh, from the nones which is next
the Lord's-day. There shall then be no work done from the afternoon
[c. 4.30] save that which I will now reckon....

We ought to keep Yule holy here in this land, that is thirteen
days. The first day of Yule and the eighth and the thirteenth shall
be kept as Pask or Easter-day, and the second day of Yule and the
third and fourth shall be kept as the Lord's-day. On all days save
these it shall be right to clean the cattle's litter, and the third
and fourth day of Yule as a man will....

Pask or Easter we ought to keep holy....

We ought to keep the mass-days that are lawfully received--



[**TODO: Verify table]
             Jan.    21.   Agnes-mass.
                     25.   Paul.
             Feb.    1.    Brigid.
                     2.    Mary [Candle-mass].
                     22.   Peter [Cathedra Petri].
                     25.   Matthias.
             Mar.    12.   Gregory.
                     21.   Benedict.
                     25.   Mary [Annuntiatio].
             April   23.   John [of Holar].
                     25.   1st Gangday.
             May     1.    Philip and James.
                     3.    Cross-mass [inventio crucis].
             June    9.    Columba.
                     24.   John [Baptist].
                     29.   Peter [and Paul] Decollatio.
             July    8.    Selia-men's-mass.
                     25.   James [the greater].
                     20.   Olafs-mass [fyrre]. Passio.
             Aug.    10.   Lawrence. (Lafranz-m.)
                     15.   Mary [Ascensio] [fyrre] [1800].
                     24.   Bartholomew.
             Sept.   8.    Mary [Nativitas] [síðare][#].
                     14.   Cross [elevatio crucis].
                     21.   Matthew.
                     29.   Michael.
             Oct.    28.   Simon and Jude.
             Nov.    1.    All Hallows.
                     11.   Martin.
                     22.   Cecilia.
                     23.   Clement.
                     30.   Andrew.
             Dec.    7.    Nicholas.
                     8.    Ambrose.
                     13.   Magnus [Decoll.][& Lucy]
                     21.   Thomas [Apostle].
                     23.   Thorlac [1801].


There be fifteen days in the twelve months that men shall not hunt more
beasts than I shall reckon up. Men may take white bears and go from
home therefor, and he hath the bear that first gives him a death-wound
(whoever own the land), save it be a thrall or a bond-debtor, then
the bond-creditor or owner shall have it.

Walrus men may hunt, and he hath half that hunteth it, and he half
that owneth the land.

Stranded whales men may move and moor, and flinch them if they cannot
moor them. If there be land-gang to fish men may take them. There
is land-gang if men may hew them with the hewing-irons or take them
with the hands [from the shore]. There shall be no net taken along
nor angle.

Men may hunt fowl moulting if they can be taken with the hands. He
shall give the fifth part thereof as of other Lord's-day hunting.


The fifteen high-days.




[**TODO: Verify table]
                     1st day of Yule.
                     8th day of Yule.
                     13th day of Yule.
                     1st day Pask.
                     Ascension-day.
                     Whit-Sunday.
                     1st Mary-mass.
                     2nd Mary-mass.
                     3rd Mary-mass.
                     4th Mary-mass.
                     All-Hallows-mass.
                     John Baptist.
                     Peter and Paul in the summer.
                     The Church-day.
                     Thorlac's-mass.


The Long-fast [Lent] we ought to keep, that is seven weeks from the
Lord's-day when we enter upon the fast, as it is declared at Moot and
Leet. When a man entereth upon the fast he shall eat flesh before
midnight, and then he shall not eat meat for seven weeks until the
sun runs upon the hill on Pask or Easter-day....

Men must not eat horse or dog or fox or cat, or any claw-beast or any
carrion-fowl. If a man eat those beasts that are forbidden he shall
pay a life-ring-garth fine....

So set they, bishop  Cetil and bishop Thorlac, by the counsel of
archbishop Auzor and of Sæmund and many other clerks, the Church-Law
Section that hath now been particularly set forth and said over.



Of Novells. This novell was made when Magnus Gizor's son was become
bishop, and it is now a lawful duty to fast these eight nights that
before were not law-bound.

A novell shall not be read longer than three summers, and shall be
said over at the Laws-hill the first summer at hallowed Spring-moots
or Leets.

All novells are loosened [dissolved] if they be not said over every
three summers.


Note on Chronology of Icelandic Saga Writers.

The following days were used in reckoning (especially in Sturlunga
and Lives of Bishops) beside those given in the text of the Law:--



[**TODO: Verify table]
Jan.    7.          Cnut, Duke. Passio.
        13.         Geisla-dagr.
        17.         Antonius-messa.
        20.         Bræðra-m.
        22.         Vincentius-m.
Feb.    3.          Blasius-m.
Mar.    3.          John (of Holar) [translatio].
        16.         Gvendar-d.(Godmund of Holar) [post classic].
        19.         Mariu-m. [Boð.].
April   13.         Euphemia.
        14.         Tiburtius-m.
        16.         Magnus-m. (Ork.) Passio [1802].
        28.         Vitalis-m.
May     15.         Hallwards-m. Passio.
        27.         Dýre-dagr [1803].
June    15.         Vítus-m.
        17.         Botolfs-m.
        21.         Leofredus-m.
        25.         Cnut, Duke [transl.].
July    2 [1804].   Thing-Mariu-m.
        10.         Cnut, King. Passio.
        15.         Sviptun's-m. [Swithun bp.] [1805], and also Divisio
                    Apostolorum.
July    20.         Thorlac's-m. [translatio] [1806].
Aug.    1.          Banda-d. Vincula.
        3.          Olafs-m. (síðare).
        6.          Sixt.-m.
        28.         Augustinus-m.
        29.         Hofud-d. Decapitatio.
Sept.   1.          Ægidius-m. (S. Giles).
        5.          Bertínus-m.
        11.         Protus and Iacint-m.
        21.         Matheus-m.
        22.         Mauritius.
        28.         Vencelaus-m.
Oct.    1.          Remigius-m.
        4.          Franciscus.
        9.          Dionysius-m.
        13.         Festum Reliquiarum.
        18.         Lucas-m.
        21.         Colnismeyja-m.
Nov.    21.         Mariu-m. [presentatio].
        25.         Catrinar-m.
Dec.    4.          Barbaru-m.
        8.          Mariu-m. [conceptio].
        16.         Jóns-m. [transl.].
        28.         Barna-d.



Of Tithe-paying or Yielding.

That is spoken in the laws here that men shall give tithe of all
their possessions here in this land, a lawful tithe. That is a
lawful tithe that a man shall give a six-ell ounce in the two seasons
[twelve months] if he have one hundred six-ell ounces.

The man that hath ten six-ell ounces besides his clothes of every-day
wear without debt, shall give an ell of wadmal, or the wool of so
many fleeces that six thereof make one packet, or a lamb pelt.

And he that hath twenty ounces, he shall give two ells.

And he that hath forty, he shall give three ells.

And he that hath sixty, he shall give four ells.

He that hath eighty, he shall give five ells.

He that hath one hundred, he shall give six ells.

This property is not to be reckoned for tithe that hath been already
given to God, that hath been laid out in church endowments, or in
bridges, or in soul-ships or ferries, whether that fee be in land or
loose moneys.

Priests need not tithe the property they have in books and
mass-clothes, or anything that they have for God's service. They
shall pay tithe of their other property....

If a man hath a godehood he need not reckon it for tithe, for it is
a power and not money.

All franklins shall pay tithe that owe neat-fare-pay, or on their
property that is debtless....

Women shall pay tithe just as men.



Of the Tithe. Men shall have meetings at the harvest-tide in every
Rape not before there be only four weeks of summer left to divide the
tithe. The division of the tithe shall take place the first Lord's-day
in winter.

Five men that are held to be the best men, franklins or grith-men,
shall be chosen in every Rape to divide the tithes and doles and take
the oaths of men.

Every man is bound to come to these meetings that hath to pay tithe,
or get a man for him that shall do the law business on his behalf,
and be a man fit to be handselled.

If he come not before midday and there be none to stand for him, then
he must pay an outlaw-fine of three marks, and he shall then pay the
tithe as it falls to his share. Then the money of men shall be reckoned
to see how much it is. They shall value land and loose money, and
shall value that money that at the lawful flitting-days was free from
debt. Every man shall value and reckon his own property. And when he
hath counted over his fee and reckoned it, then he shall take the book
in hand or a cross, and name witnesses in witness thereto. He shall
declare that 'I take an oath on the book, a lawful oath, and say this
to God, that I owe as much money as I have now reckoned or less.'...

The Rape-men that are appointed shall divide every man's tithe into
four parts, save it be less than an ounce tithe, and then it is right
that it be put into one place.

One-fourth of the tithe shall be given to needy folk within the Rape,
such as need to have pauper-help in that season, and divide it among
them, giving them more that have more need thereof....

A second fourth of the tithe the bishop shall have....

Now there are left two-fourths, that is half the tithe of each man,
that shall be laid out on the church, and on the wages of the priests,
to every church as the bishop divideth the tithes, and it shall be
paid into those men's hands that are the patrons of the church to
which the tithe is dealt or shared out. He shall buy the services or
hours of the priest as far as he can, and provide such other things for
the needs of the church as are needed, as far as the money will go....



Of Weapon-bearing in Church. Men shall not bear weapons in church
or oratory that is licensed for services to be held in, and they
shall not set them against the church gable or the church walls. And
these are reckoned weapons under this head--ax and sword and spear
and cutlass and halberd. If a man break this law he shall pay a
life-ring-garth fine....



Of Farming an Estate. If a man dwell on a glebe or church estate, he
shall keep up the houses and garths so that the land be not spoilt or
wasted, and if the land be wasted or spoilt in his holding thereof,
he shall make such amends to the church as five neighbours declare
it to be worth on the book.

If a man better church land he shall have God's thanks therefor,
but he may not get amends therefor.



Of Rape-parting.

Law-rapes we shall have here in the land. And that is a lawful Rape
wherein are twenty franklins or more, though it may be fewer only if
the Laws-court-men have given leave.

The franklins that are reckoned in the Rape-reckoning shall be [such as
are] bound to pay Moot-fare-pay. Though men break up their Rapes into
fourths or trithing, or as they wish to have it, for the allowances
of food or the sharing-out of tithes, yet it is right that there be
never fewer [franklins] in a Rape than twenty.

The Rapes shall be so set that every franklin sit next the others
therein. The Rapes shall be all set as they are now.

Five landowners shall be taken to jurisdiction in each Rape to pursue
all those men that make default in the Rape, and also for sharing-out
of men's tithes and gifts of food or doles, and giving oaths to men....




CHAPTER 9

§ 9. CHURCH CHARTERS.


Crosses and churches were known in Iceland all along from the days
of the Settlement. The Book of Settlement tells us, and place-names
bear witness to the same, how the Irish Settlers and Christianised
Norsemen, coming from their home in the Isles of the West, used at
their arrival to raise a cross (of such make, one thinks, as is
still found in Iona), and there they held their prayers. So Lady
Aud (Ld. II. 14. 8), and in I. 6. 5, the very prayer uttered is
recorded. Prayers, not preaching, being the chief thing, churches would
be of rarer occurrence; yet one church is on record, namely, Ld. I. 6,
where we meet with a singular phenomenon--the great heathen temple
at the All-moot on Keelness, and a church dedicated to S. Patrick at
Esjuberg, standing for three generations side by side as it were,
within two miles distance of one another. At that church, by the
way, was preserved the old Gospel-book, written in Irish characters
[9th century?]. Some of the Kirkbys must go back to the same date;
for instance, Kirkby in Side (Ld. IV. 16. 1). But cross or church,
whatsoever was Christian, it was all of Irish descent. In 981 the
first mission arrived in Iceland; between that date and 1000 only
one church is recorded to have been built,--that at Ridge (see p. 380).

Christianity being officially and nationally accepted, of course at
once led to the building of churches (see p. 329). But to find out
what churches were built in the early times of the Change of Faith,
scanty and scattered notices must be picked up here and there in the
Classic Literature that has come down to us. Most of the churches
put up during this period would seem to have been timbered shortly
after the national vote of 1001, and in the few years between 1016-24,
when the influence of S. Olave was felt. During the fifty years that
followed 1030 little seems to have been done. For the West there is,
as usual, somewhat fuller information, but we may well suppose what
took place there to be a fair standard by which to reckon what happened
elsewhere, for the impulse was universal.

Sholto drops silently out of our recorded history; his end is not told,
but, if it had taken place soon after the Conversion, it would hardly
have escaped notice, and if, as is likely, he survived it some years,
being a man of wealth, position, and piety, it is pretty certain that
he would have built a church at his own place in Theorsar-dale.

Gizor's church at Scalholt developed, as we see from Hunger-waker,
into the chief cathedral of Iceland, associated with the names of
many good and godly men.

Taking the West Country first, there was Gelle's church at
Holyfell, 1001-8, burnt down and succeeded by a second at Holyfell,
c. 1020-30, which well exemplifies a phenomenon that we meet with
elsewhere--namely, that when famous heathen shrines to which respect
was paid and resort made, were disestablished and discredited, their
place was taken by a Christian church, which succeeded to the renown
and popularity of the older fane, this being of course due to the
influence of the great family of chiefs still living there.

There being no church in the Dales (see Reader, pp. 20, 21), the body
of Ceartan, who was slain in 1003, was taken to Thorstan Egilsson's
church at Borg, which was then newly consecrated and in its white
weeds. But when Snorre left Holyfell he built a church at Tongue
(1009-30, Eyrbyggia, 1864, pp. 125-6), where in 1023 he buried his
mother. There, too, was laid Borc his uncle, and there his own grave
was made in 1031, as is declared in the last chapters of Eyrbyggia Saga
(see above, p. 134, and in the Mela-book fragment, p. 135).

In Hitar-dal, at the church at Walldr, was buried Beorn the
Hot-river-dale champion, S. Olave's contemporary; and in Beorn's
Saga and one MS. of S. Olave's Life, there is told the tale of the
garter of S. Olave, its miraculous resistance to decay, and its use
as a chalice-cover in Walldr church.

At the All-moot the Ting-wald or Thing-field church (see Libellus,
p. 290) probably occupied the site of the heathen temple to which Grim
ministered. S. Olave (c. 1020) sent timber out for this church, and
Harald Hardrede some years afterwards gave the bell. So it is nonsense
in Nial's Saga, ch. 144, where, in the episode of Eyolf Bolwerksson,
there is talk of dead bodies being taken to the church at the All-moot.

The church of Red-leek [Rauda-leykar] is mentioned in Liósvetninga
Saga, and it was a tiny church of the older type, as appears from
the story (see vol. ii. p. 409).

In the South-East we should expect Flose, in spite of the hereditary
cult of Frey in his family and story of his connection with the
Swine-fell spirit, to have built a church on his great estate near
Swine-fell, and in all probability Hall had a church on his estate,
and the name Kirkby speaks this way, but there is little evidence as
to the early history of the last place, save the gloss in Nial's Saga,
ch. 97.

In the North there are fewer churches noticed than in the West. Thorkel
Crafla had a church in Hawk-dale, as Cristne Saga witnesses. Further,
if we may trust the end of Glum's Saga, Glum was buried at Forn-haye,
the only church in Harrow-dale, N. Eyfirth (see p. 479). Snorre
(see ii. 607) the son of Carlsemne founds a church at Glaumby in
Shaw-frith. The famous church of Holar, the northern cathedral,
was, according to Bishop John's Life, due to Oxe Sholtosson, but we
believe this foundation must be earlier than the first half of the 11th
century. We should assign a date between 1009-30 to it, for we take
Oxe to be the son of Sholto Thordsson, named in Gretti's Saga, ch. 70,
as dwelling at Hof in Sholto-dale, and accordingly great-grandson of
Sholto Skalpsson the Settler.

In the South we should expect Thorgils Scarleg to have built a
church. The stone church Illugi priest Ingemund's son was building
at Broad-bowster is mentioned above in Mantissa. Thord was priest at
Reykholt in the middle of the 11th century.

These churches were all founded by great chiefs for their own benefit,
and the endowments given of the pure goodwill of the founder. There
was, in fact, as may be clearly seen from the evidence supplied by
Libellus and Hunger-waker, no church establishment in Iceland or
general organization till the days of Islaf, or more exactly, till
after the first ten years of Bishop Gizor.

With these two men, the pious Islaf and the prince-bishop Gizor, begins
a new order of things. Christianity was ordered and established,
diocesan organization was carried out by a succession of able and
vigorous rulers. From the death of Gizor's mother we may date the
establishment in Iceland, marked by the endowment of Scalholt, the
seat of the bishopric. The rebuilding of the cathedral church itself
is connected with this endowment. To Gizor was owing the census of
franklins taken, we cannot doubt, for tithe purposes, the Tithe-Law
carried in the All-moot in 1196, the establishment of a second
bishopric in the North. To Gizor must be referred, one may be sure,
though there is no direct statement thereon in our authorities, the
systematic parcelling out of the land into parishes, the regulation
of the duties and rights of parish priests, the ordinances respecting
the distribution and levying of tithes. Behind the brief but pregnant
notices of his activity in Libellus there is much to be divined. It
was, in fact, Gizor that gave the Icelandic Church the bent it kept
throughout the Middle Ages down to the Reformation. The Christian
Law Section carried by Gizor's sainted successor Thorlac, and by
his northern fellow-bishop Cetil c. 1125, completed Gizor's work
of organization.

The foundation and endowment of new churches by the great chiefs marks
the renewed activity roused by Bishop Gizor's exertions, and though
the records are scanty, there are some notices from which we can see
the extent of the movement. Thus Sæmund the historian founded a church
at Odde, as we know from the testimony of his grandson. Thord founded
a church at Water-firth, to which his great-grandson bore witness in
the famous Water-firth case (see p. 637). Brand set up a church at
House-fell in Borg-frith, as we are told in Laxdæla Saga. A great
church was built and endowed at Thing-eyre, c. 1120, in pursuance
of the vow taken by Bishop John on behalf of the whole Moot after
the long drought of 1110. Oxe's church at Holar having been burnt,
was rebuilt in 1105-6.

There might be more instances given, but these will suffice. But
a still more characteristic feature of the time is the pressing of
the chiefs and heads of great families to take orders. The list of
1143 will show how far this movement had gone. After 1190 Bishop Paul
took a Church-census, whereby he found that there were in his diocese
of Scalholt 220 churches and 290 priests. The taking of orders and
endowing of churches by the great chiefs led to great difficulties,
when the time came in Iceland (as it had come in England with Anselm
and Thomas) for existing facts to be interpreted by the light of the
new ideas that were quickening the Church, and out of it sprang the
quarrels over the Glebe Endowments which plunged all Iceland into
strife in the 13th century.

The mal-dage or charter of endowment was originally somewhat of
the nature of a private deed, a covenant for a beloved daughter's
dowry rather than a conveyance in mortmain [1807]. The patron of the
church often gave a handsome endowment from his own home estate. No
doubt pride as well as piety had its influence in stimulating his
generosity, but he was usually willing to act generously, for was it
not a family matter, and was he not to have the administration of the
endowment? Would it not be one of his own kindred or clients that would
serve the church under the patronage of himself and his heirs? But
the reign of Canon Law was at hand, and the early prince-bishops were
followed by lawyer-bishops who did not sympathise with the claims
of the great patrons, but were moved partly by zeal for the church,
partly by love of order, partly by the absolute need of proper
discipline and the advance of new ideas of church prerogative, to
interpret these charters in a spirit utterly different from that with
which the first founders executed them. The patrons, their assignees
and heirs, resisted the bishops' encroachments, and after a long and
bitter struggle the matter was finally settled by the acceptance of
the Norwegian King's ruling. Of these important documents we here
give representative specimens.

They were first legally required to be in writing by the Christian
Law Section (possibly carrying out a rule of Bishop Gizor's), and were
kept at the church ; but later, probably under the Norwegian bishops,
men of order who needed and were used to records, Registers were set
up at the cathedrals, wherein copies of these documents, and probably
in many cases the documents themselves, were entered, for the sake of
security and convenience of reference. What the original mal-dage was
like we can see from the only specimen extant, the Reek-holt Charter,
a broad-sheet of vellum (admirably facsimiled some years ago, and
accessible to English readers in Sir Richard Burton's Iceland),
on which entries are made from time to time of endowments as they
are bestowed. Owing to fires and other damage all others of these
broadsheet church charters have unluckily perished.

Moreover the Registers themselves have also perished, but of them we
have two copies of the paper age. The one, D. 12 of the Reykjavik
Library, bears this attestation of its contents and age: 'All that
is here before written in this book have I, Bearne Marteinsson,
written according to old charter-quires and charter-leaves, clear
and good at Scalholt, anno 1601, in the Short-days [dead of winter]
[1808].' The other, AM. 263, states that it was 'compiled according
to old charters 1598 [1809].' Thus these paper copies were taken
about the time when John Egilsson was making his abstracts from
Hunger-waker and writing his Aubrey-like Lives of the 16th century
bishops. It is also possible that Bishop Odd, who encouraged John,
may have suggested the taking of these copies.

The original books from which D. 12 and AM. 263 are taken, perished
in the fire at Scalholt in 1630, as did also several later collections
of Registers, that of Bishop Wilchin of c. 1400 among them.

Next comes the question of the age and correctness of these Register
copies. What criterions have we for determining this? First, we must
examine the one original, the Reek-holt broad-sheet vellum. The first
hand of this document is of course præ-Snorrean; it has been put to
c. 1181, to S. Thorlac's time, by pure guess-work. We should rather
suppose it to be earlier, say c. 1140, on diplomatic grounds. The
second hand is imitative of the first, and though it is dated after
1205-6, and somewhere between that time and 1230, it is by no means
a characteristic hand of the early 13th century. The third hand,
Snorrean, is frankly of 13th century type. The fourth, a fine script,
the Editor would place after 1250, say 1270.

Now it is to be noted that in the Register-text only the three first
handwritings of this Reek-holt charter are entered; ergo, we are
entitled to conclude that the Registers were compiled before the
fourth handwriting was written on the charter--that is, somewhere
between the years 1240 and 1270.

The Editor can well remember the mouldering MS. of Bearne Marteinsson,
when it was in the hands of his friend Mr. Sigurdsson in 1855, and he
noticed that a middle part of D. 12 was evidently an old, separate,
and single collection, the rest of Bearne's work being gathered
from other sources. The Editor at that time urged Mr. Sigurdsson to
print D. 12 as it stood, so that the student might have the means of
seeing the original composition of that collection; but he preferred
to try and arrange them in chronological order, and broke up the
MS. order. Owing to this decision, which was certainly a mistake,
there being no date to any charter in the MSS., a rough guess had
in many cases to be made as to the time when a given document was
executed. No dependence therefore must be placed upon the hypothetical
dates of the Icelandic Diplomatarium. One is left in fact to internal
evidence, which, as the spelling was freely altered by the scribes,
is not always easy to estimate, and to the few pieces of external
evidence which are to be found in Sturlunga, the Annals, &c.

Most of the charters we give here come from the old collection in
D. 12.

There is another question to be settled. How far do these copies
faithfully transmit the original broad-sheet vellums? We are struck
by the fact that, though many of these deeds go back some time before
1250, there is little trace of their original type; little mention of
patron's rights and privileges; few marks of the original intentions
of such endowments. Yet in the great suit of the Men of Odde in the
South over the glebe originally conveyed to spiritual uses by Sæmund
the historian, and the Water-firth suit in the West, there was full
knowledge shown of the original charters. In Arne's Saga there is
express mention of the founder's rights; and endowment charters are
by law read at the Fifth Court. There is a difficulty here.

The answer seems to be that the bishops, who assuredly did not have
these charters copied out of antiquarian curiosity, were rather
concerned in their registries with the rights of the Church than the
privileges and reservations of the founders and patrons. Moreover,
inasmuch as many of the founders' claims were held by them to be
contrary to the Canon Law, and some even sinful in themselves (as one
can see from the Bishops' Lives), they would almost certainly refuse
to register such provisions, since they could not allow them to be
binding or hold them worthy of mention.

As to the contents of the Charters they speak for themselves. The
rights of the Church are usually first recorded, and its burdens or
liabilities follow, tithe-rules and bounds and burial-rights are often
noted. The saint the church is dedicated to [1810] is not always
mentioned, nor is the founder's name always given, though we may
suppose that the earliest deeds would generally have recorded these
facts. There is sometimes an inventory of the church moveables. Three
of the originals are printed on p. 636; the rest are translated.

We also print a version, the inspeximus of the judgment of 1273, on the
cases of S. Nicholas's Church at Odde and S. Olave's in Water-firth,
and the King's final settlement of the Glebe case in 1297.


Charter of Bank-land in Borg-firth to the Hospital there.

Tanne [Irish: Tadgh] and Hall-frith they two gave half Bank-land to
the hospital that is there, by the counsel of bishop Gizor, and by
the leave of the heirs. There go therewith ten cows and sixty ewes,
and a new boat.

Tanne shall have the rule of the place as long as he lives, and
then the bishop that is at Scalholt. And the man that dwelleth there
shall feed all men that he think it well should be fed.--D. I. p. 169
(D. 12, fol. 68).


Charter to Church under Raun.

They two, Tanne [Tadgh] and Hall-frith, have given to the church under
Raun half that land with all the fruit of the land, sixteen cows,
and ten oxen four winters old, and sixty old wethers, three horses,
two hundred four-ell ounces of church furniture. There shall go
herewith a silver chalice, a church-hanging, five bells.

There shall be a priest having his abode there, and a deacon, and a
poor woman. And if the deacon cannot be got there, then there shall be
a poor man in his place. Then there will be two poor folk there. The
man that dwelleth there shall feed one night about every man whom he
think it well should be fed.

They two, Tanne and Hall-frith, give this to the governance of the
bishop at Scalholt, who shall be warden of this homestead, and keep
up the expenses that are herein declared.

Bishop Thorlac [Thorlac I] will have the tithes paid there of
the fourteen homesteads that he named when he was there at the
homestead.--D. I. p. 74 (D. 12, fol. 62).


Charter to S. Mary's Church at Hot-river-ness.

Mary's church at Hot-river-ness owneth Hot-river-ness land with all
its profits.    She hath ten cows, and a hundred ewe-worth sheep,
ten hundred ells in farm implements and house furniture, twenty
weights of meat, except of seals and fishes.

This is the outlay for this property, that there shall be a priest
domiciled, and sing all the services; and every other day two masses in
the Long-fast [Lent]; every day a mass through the Yule-fast [Advent],
and ever when mass should be said when the priest is at home; vigils
every evening in Lent, then lections. There shall be lights every
night from the later Mary-mass till Pask [Easter] week is over.

There also shall be two poor women that can help themselves out of
the kin of Thorhall and Stanwend.

Iorwend shall be warden of this property, and his heirs, if the bishop
think them fit withal, or else one out of Thorhall's kin or Stanwend's,
who the bishop wills.

The church hath three altar-cloths, two candlesticks, two bells, two
hand-basins, and a hanging to go round the church, ten marks of wax.

At four marks of wadmal the priest shall be fed.

Burial is allowed there.--D. I. p. 275 (D. 12, fol. 103).


Charter to Christby at Upsal in Land-brot.

Christby that standeth at Upsal hath Godwine given to God Almighty
with all the good thereof. There shall also go with it six cows,
thirty-five ewes and wether sheep. There shall also go with it
twenty-one ounces worth in kind, a measure of corn, five horses' loads
of rush-wood, eighty of sand-grass, off Highton-mell, and they shall
be stored there, the sand-grass closes that lie between Highton-mell
and Harrow-dale-mell shall also go therewith, the shore-rights that
are at the mouth of the glen, three-hundred-and-twenty which ought
to go with the three lands which Godwine established.

There shall one poor woman go therewith. There shall be paid
half-a-mark of wadmal at Kirkby on Shear-Thursday. There is no
guest-maintenance ordered. He may feed whom he will at pleasure. He
shall not be bound to be in any quest or summonses, nor to pay
moot-fare-fee. There shall every man, inlaw or outlaw, be buried at
the church that shall lose his life on this land. There shall also
only be that franklin there whom the Rape-rulers shall give leave
there to be withal.--D. I. p. 199 (from a vellum scroll).


The Christby at Keld-gnup or Keld-peak in the Side [S. Peter's].

Christby, which Bearnhedin and Ogmund established at Keld-peak,
is given to Christ and Peter, the land thereof with all its outcome
and profits. There follow [with it] six cows and forty ewes, and one
sheep a year old, and fourteen ounces, six-ell ounces, in cloth and
corn-meal, or half a weight of meat.

This is the outlay or charges upon Christby: there shall be
there a helpless woman, but one that is able to don and doff her
clothes. A half-mark of wadmal shall be payable in Kirkby shear-day
or Peter's-mass, and the salary to the priest besides. There shall
also be given a man's portion on the first day of Yule and Pask-day
and Whit-Sunday; and the sheep's milk of all the flock shall be given
at Peter's-mass at the morning meal. A lamb shall be marked out of
the weaning-fold, and Peter shall take the risk thereof, and it shall
be given [him] at the harvest-tide when it comes back. All needy men
and they that are journeying on errands shall be fed.--D. I. p. 201
(from a vellum scroll).


Charter to the Church at Asolf-scal under Ey-fell.

This is the church charter at Asolf-scal that she [the church]
owneth half the land, and six cows, and a steer one winter old, four
bells, and hangings to go round, a silver chalice, and a set of mass
raiment, three altar-cloths, four candlesticks, two hand-basins,
an incense-bowl, and a banner, three books, a psalter and an obit
scroll, and a service [?] book.

Here shall the house-tithe of men be paid also from the Northern
Asolf-scal and from Peak. And thither there shall be bound to be mass
sung every fourth lawful holyday and a mass for the souls one day
in the week of Lent, save the first and last week. Such mass-singing
was also bound to be at Inner Asolf-scal. Twelve masses at Northern
Asolf-scal.

This is the outlay here. That a priest shall have his abode here,
and sing every holyday, and not hire him out any matins. There shall
mass be sung three days not holydays in the week when there is no
fast, and in Gang fast [Rogations] four. There shall be bound to be
a mass sung every Saturday when the priest is at home, and every day
at Yule-fast [Advent], and two masses at Long-fast [Lent]. From the
former Mary-mass [Dec. 8] the lights shall be burnt during winter
on holydays till the later Mary-mass [March 18], and thenceforward
every night till Cross-mass in the spring [May 3]. Wax candles shall
be burnt at matins at the holydays that are the most kept. Incense
shall be in the censer every day that there are nine lections in the
matins at mass.--D. I. p. 255 (D. 12, fol. 54).


Charter to the Church at Staff's-holt in Borg-firth.

This is the charter of Staff's-holt, according as priest Steane
Thorward's son made it. He gave to the church all the house land,
and twenty cows, one hundred ewe sheep, sixty wether sheep with ewes,
sixty winter-old sheep, ten cows-worth of oxen, five horses, fifteen
hundred in house furniture and farm furniture also within the walls,
three parts of the salmon fishery in Thwart-water, the weir fishery
in North-water under the fell, land at Swarf-knoll and Berg-stone,
Temple-stead, Lax-holt, Western Shaw-land, Eng-ness [Mead-ness],
Strand-mouth, and the wreck-right [jetsam] therewith, commons
in West-river-dale on the eastern side, and all Mid-dale-mull,
all Beorn's-dale down from Meal-fell-gil, the sheep-walk in
Thwart-water-dale up from the Folds, Rush-ey in Hrod-water, all
the eyot whereon Thwart-water-moot is held, Thrall-ey south from
Bild's-hammer [Bild's-crag].

And here by this charter there shall be three priests, and a mass
deacon that shall read at the matins; but if there be one priest at
Herd-holt [1811], there shall be only two priests at Staff's-holt,
for that [Staff's-holt] is under this. And here, moreover, there shall
be two poor women of the kindred of Steane so old that they cannot
[1812] work for themselves.--D. I. p. 179 (D. 12, fol. 66).


Charter to the Church at House-fell in Borg-firth.

This is the charter of the church at House-fell, that Brand Thorarin's
son giveth there to the church the land of House-fell, and the other
land that pertaineth thereto, with all the profits of the land,
that go therewith.

There shall go therewith five cows and thirty ewes, and one hundred
four-ell ounces of house furniture and farm implements.

There shall ever be a resident priest. Matins and mass he shall sing
every holyday there, and sing mass every day when there are nine
lections in the matins. He shall sing mass every fast-day and All
Soul-days [Ember-days], every other day through the Yule-fast [Advent],
and every day through Long-fast [Lent], and for every holyday that
he miss the service there shall be provided three meals for the needy.

There shall lights be burnt in the church from the former Mary-mass
[Aug. 14], every holyday till Michaelmas [Sept. 29], and every night
from thence till Pask or Easter-week be ended.

[Bishop Clong gave leave to bury there at the church the men of the
household that died there [1813].]

There shall ever one poor woman be kept at the church on those moneys,
whom Brand Thorarin's son shall choose out of his kin, or his sons. And
Brand Thorarin's son shall be warden of these church properties as long
as he will, and then his sons as long as they will. They shall appoint
a warden if they will give it up, and if they have no heirs that can
take charge of it, then they shall take a man out of their kindred,
to be warden of the church property, whom the bishop shall think well
fitted withal, that ruleth in Scalholt. And he shall be responsible
for the church and all the ornaments thereof against fire and all hurt,
that is warden of the church property.--D. I. p. 217 (D. 12, fol. 71).


Charter to Reek-holt Church [S. Peter's].

To the church in Reek-holt belongeth the house land with the profit of
all the land that pertaineth thereto, twenty cows, a steer two winters
old, a hundred-and-thirty [= 150] ewes. There pertaineth thereto five
parts of all Grim's-water, but three parts not save what I will now
count up--that is, all the flood-fence and three parts of the river
north of Mid-rock, but the fourth not. There pertaineth thereto also a
fourth part of Harrow-pool, after the sixth part is excepted, and the
fishing down at Red-water-oyce. There pertaineth thereto three horses
no worse than fourteen ounces [worth apiece]. There pertaineth thereto
also a [mountain] sheep-walk at the Copses, with the river fishing,
a half that pertaineth thereto, and commons in Ram-frith-heath,
and the intakes [spots isolated] that she [the church] hath in
Fax-dale and Goat-land with the shaw. The shaw in Sand-dale down
from Sclack-gil [Slope-gill] round Scal-toft. The mark goeth down
from the rocks or stones that are called Cloven,--they stand over
against Sand-dale's river,--and thence up to the Fell's-brow. There
pertaineth thereto the wood or rushes on Thwart-water-lithe for wood
for the shieling. A turbary in Stein-thors-stead land, a measure of
seed corn sown.--D. I. p. 279 (from the original broad-sheet).

[N.B. The text of Hands 1, 2, and 3 (dateable 1205, c. 1224, and
c. 1230) are given in Sturl. ii. p. 503.]


Charter of Agreement touching Holy-fell Cloister.

We have agreed to this agreement, that these--Gudmund, Olaf, and
Eyjolf--shall take the church estate here at Holy-fell, and hold
here canon's life, if God give the means thereto, as many as there
may be therein while my life shall be, and hold the church estates
as long as they wish and are able, and he of them that lives longest,
if he be able.

Now I would that one or other, Gudmund or Olaf, take this see [of
abbacy] after me, if they take heed to themselves and there come no
blemish in their way such as might stand in the way, and if it be
not so, then I would that they shall meet together [1814] and take an
abbot, if so might be I would like it best that he were of my kin, if
so it might be with the supervision of the bishop. Now if there be not
sufficient means to found a monastery, whatsoever there lack thereto,
we have nevertheless established what clerks shall be here--five that
can sing mass [i.e. priests], a deacon and sub-deacon. Two masses
every day not a holyday, and also the holydays as the prior will;
all other service to be held as seemeth right.

To meet these outlays are these parcels of property, our lands, which
go together with the island which the abbot bought then without intake
[burden or easement?], and with all rents, faggot-wood in Drang-land,
and Erne-knoll, twenty cows, two broken oxen and a steer, eight horses
at the least, twenty hundred in farm stores and house furniture and
the profits thereof that are within walls, a quern, and a seal-net,
two boats (one eight-oared, the other six-oared), a hundred books,
and mass-vestments, and all other church vestments, four bells and
a shrine. All this property I put as worth three-hundred-hundreds,
and hundred ells-worth cows-worth of this property as therein is
[?].--D. I. p. 282 (Bp. Wilchin's Register).


Charter to the Church at Red-leek in Little Hundred [S. Mary's].

Mary's Church that standeth at Red-leek owneth all the home land,
and Lathe-holt, Lang-ness and Bank, with all their yield, all the
islands [1815] that appertain to Hills, three parts of Ingolf's-head,
but two parts owneth he that dwelleth at Eyre-horn. The church owneth
half the fishery; she owneth a meadow-strip at Gain-hills. Thirty
horses of Red-leek shall be kept in Cross-holt's-land both winter
and summer, fifteen old oxen in the Hill-land, one hundred and sixty
wethers shall be kept in the Fell-land; one-third of the commons is
on Fold-myre. All the shaws that run out from Sheep-bows-shaw to the
shaw that pertaineth to Scam-stead. One strip of shaw that is in the
dale at Iokle's-fell. The cheese-tax through all the hundred between
Broad-sand and Loom-peak-sand belongeth to Red-leek. The church
owneth fifteen cows, and five cows-worth in oxen, and ninety-five
cows-worth in wethers, twelve hundred in choice beasts, fifteen
hundred in mass-vestments, all valued. All those glebes [1816]
that are between Grave-brink and Iokle's-river, as also the church
tithes, save from Sand-fell, belong to the place at Red-leek. The
shore rights are not put down here in particular, because they are
only those that have before been brought into the Court of Laws. But
those that appertain to Long-ness have since been added.

This shall be the outlay of this property, the keep of two priests
and a deacon. They shall not sing there less than two masses once
a week, and all vigil-days and Ember-days, every day at Long-fast
[Lent] and every day at Yule-fast [Advent].

The church owneth the shore between the Fold-water and Hammer-ends,
half with the Sand-fell-men. Another shore she hath south of
the Fold-water up to One-anger. The third shore she owneth off
Eyre-horn. Two parts of all wreck with the Sand-fell-men [who have
one part], but the choice of an eighth part of food jetsam [stranded
whales and the like].--D. I. p. 248 (from a vellum quire).

[The text is printed in Sturl. (1878) ii. p. 503.]


Charter to Mell Church in Borg-firth.

This is the charter of the church at Mell, that she hath all the house
land intakeless [without charge], with all the profits and rents that
Thor-lac [fl. 1150] bought and Magnus [his son] gave withal.

These are the landmarks between Mell and Belby-holt--a flat stone
north of the mouth of Scal-beck and up from the stone to Scal-holt, and
thence to Titling's-holt, and thence in an eye-line to Ward-holt, and
thence to Byrgi's-holt, and thence in an eye-line to Fish-beck-stockade
or folds, and then to Fowl-tump, a short way from the town-garth
at Fish-beck, the stack-garth-mead to Fish-beck water-meadow or
water-trenches, and out of Fowl-tump to Earth-crosses south in the
water-meadow or trenches by the beck, and an eye-line thence to the
stone up over the Holt's-foot, and an eye-line out of the Holt to
Cringle-tump, and an eye-line thence to Land-slip-swamps as it goes
from the south to the Mere. The fence goes out of Mell-mere down to
Maiden-mere out by the fence at Ridge. Another fence runs down out
of the town-garth at Ridge, and down to the gill west of the fenced
acre at Ridge.

The church owneth all the wreck thence from the gill up to the stone
north of Scal-beck-mouth.

The shepherd at Mell hath a right to sit in the town-garth at Ridge.

The church hath all the mountain sheep-walks that lie between
Force-beck and Tongue-river.

The church hath an everlasting right to Fish-beck, a mark of wax or
a sheep at harvest-tide as good as the wax.

There shall also be two priests, or a priest and deacon and a poor
woman of Magnus's kin.

There is leave to bury all corpses, that men will bring thither and
may be brought to church [not in ban].

There pertain to the church the tithes of fifteen homesteads and
half of the haven; there pertain thereto the churches at Leek,
and Havem, and three oratories, and there is due six marks from
each.--D. I. p. 271 (D. 12, fol. 120).


Charter to Withey Cloister.

This charter was made at the All-moot by the counsel of bishop
Magnus, and Snorre Sturla's son brought it up at the Laws Court,
and named witness.

That between Reek-ness and Boz-water there shall be paid of every
homestead where cheese is made such a loaf [of cheese] as is there
made to the church-estate in Withey every harvest, and in return
all they that do or pay this homage to the church-estate share in
the prayers of the brethren and clerks of the church-estate, as it
is set in the rule every day with all those men that do good or pay
rent to the church-estate for charity or the good of souls.

These were witnesses: Magnus Gudmund's son; and Asmund his brother;
Arne Magnusson; the sons of Thord, Thorlaf, Bead-war, and Marcus;
Tait Thorwald's son; Sigurd Jonsson; Styrme Carason; Ketil Thorlac's
son; Orm Codran's son; Styrkar Swein-beorn's son; Jerusalem-Beorn;
Codran Swart-head's son.--D. I. p. 496 (AM. 263).

[The text is printed in Sturl. (1878) ii. p. 400.]


Charter to Eyre Church in Elfet's-frith.

This is the charter to Eyre in Elfet's-frith, that there shall be
one priest there.

The church owneth hangings round all the church, two bells, a silver
chalice, four altar-cloths, four candlesticks, three hand-basins,
three incense-vessels and one fire-bearer, three rood crosses and
one picture, ten hundreds in choice cattle, ships and nets or farm
furniture or house ornaments, ten hundred in kind, beside four cows,
and an ox with a cow.

There is in another place ten hundred in kind, which Gudrun
Sweinbeorn's daughter [H. 1200] gave to the church.

And all this property is rightly paid in the land according to +
worthing [1817].

To it appertain the tithes of Holmslatr and Orlygsstead, and all
between, save the franklin's tithe in Outer Lang-dale that is the
richest in the dale. Thence shall they pay to Eyre three marks every
season, whether there be a domiciled priest at Lang-dale or not.

A fourth of a cheese every franklin that owes moot-fare-fee in
Eyre-moot ought to pay to Eyre.

Mass is sung from Eyre at Holmslatr, and at Leet, at Bank and to
Drangs, in Oxeney, in Lang-dale, at Car-stead.--D. I. p. 465 (D. 12,
fol. 68).


Nicholas kirkja í Mýnese á tio hundroð í lande. Þar scal syngja annan
hvárn dag log helgan, oc enn fiórða hvern ótto soeng oc kaupa þrim
morcom, oc scal heima tiund. Sá scal hafa heimilis-prest es býr í
Mýnese ef hann vill, enda misse enge annur kirkja.

Lýsa scal þar frá Máriu-messo vnz líðr Pasca vico fyrer þá daga alla
es sungen es messa efter um dagenn.--D. I. p. 249 (D. 12, fol. 130).



Germanus kirkja á Streite á land þat allt, kýr tvær oc tottogo oc
fiórtán aura í bús gognom, oc scal fylgja kven-gildr ómage fióm
þessom. Þar scal syngja ii messor ens fiórða tigar log-helga daga,
en til ero skilðer í þessom soeng, Cyndil-messa, Máriu-messa en fyrre
oc annarr dagr Pasca. Þar scal syngja átta daga rúm-helga, oc es í því
tale Osco dagr oc Germanus dagr. Þessar tíðer scal kaupa tveim morcom
vaðmála, oc liggr hon under Heydala kirkjo oc þangat scal tiund gialda.

Lýsa scal oc vetrenn fyrer þá daga es sungen es messa efter um
dagenn.--D. I. p. 250 (D. 12, fol. 130).



Máriu kirkja á Gufu-nese á xxc í lande oc kýr ij cross oc cloccor;
silfr-calec oc messo-fot, tiolld um hverfis, alltara clæðe iij,
Vatn-ker, glóða-ker oc elld-bera, slopp oc munn-laugar ij; lás oc
kerta sticor ij.

Þar scal tiund heima af ix bæjom oc svá groftr. Þar scal vesa prestr,
oc syngja allar heimilis tíðer, ij messor hvern dag um Langa-fosto:
messa hvern vígiliu dag, hvern dag um Ióla-fosto ij messor, nacquern
Imbro dag á Ióla-fosto, oc of haust.

Lýsa frá Mário-messer unz líðr Pásca vico.--D. I. p. 269 (D. 12,
fol. 80).


Inspeximus 1518 of Judgment of 1273 in Archbishop's Court at Bergen.

We, brother Ogmund by God's long-suffering abbot of Widey, to all
good men to wit, by this our letter patent, that we have inspected
and seen the old register of the holy church of Scalholt, running
thus word by word as here standeth written.

On a day appointed of the ides of July, there were before Us our
worthy brother Arne bishop at Scalholt, on behalf of his church,
and the layman named Sighwat Halfdan's son, on behalf of himself and
his brethren, and Einar Thorwald's son, for his brethren.

Then the bishop aforesaid brought before the court his petition in this
manner as is here said:--'To the worthy lord John, archbishop. I,
Arne bishop at Scalholt claim this before God and you against
Sighwat Halfdan's son, that he holdeth and calleth his the church
of S. Nicholas in Odde, as regardeth the administration and all the
outcome thereof, together with his brethren. Now, inasmuch as Sighwat
ought to make answer here for them all, therefore we make petition that
ye adjudge to Holy Church all the rights that she ought to have, and
to me and my lawful successors the free possession and administration
of the church, such as belongeth to the Scalholt bishop according to
the law.'

This answer made Sighwat Halfdan's son to bishop Arne--that he thought
that the disposition should stand which Sæmund Sigfusson made of
Oddestead, whereby he disposed of the administration and wardship
thereof to himself and his heirs for ever.

Then Sighwat was asked whether Oddestead was called a glebe. He
answered he could not gainsay it, but on the understanding that the
Odde family had the wardship of it. Sighwat also admitted before
the archbishop that Stanwar, his mother, bought Oddestead of Beorn
Sæmund's son and Sæmund Haralld's son, and afterwards they (Sighwat
and his brethren) took it in inheritance after her, and he had to
make answer for his brethren in this case, and they had agreed thereto.

In the same way bishop Arne petitioned archbishop John to adjudge to
him the rule and administration, as belongeth to Scalholt's bishop
according to God's law, of the church in Waterfrith out of the hands
of Einar Thorwald's son, that called the church his to administer.

Then Einar's answer was that his father's father's father
[great-grandfather] let build the church in Waterfrith, and had it
consecrated with this covenant, that he and his right heirs one after
the other should own the administration and wardship thereof.

Bishop Arne thus saith to both Sighwat and Einar, that it seemed
to him that they may not rightfully own or hold these, and that the
worthy lord John archbishop, in dutiful obedience to God and him, had
bidden him to put right by the power of his episcopal office especially
these and other like matters which he should see needed to be amended
in Iceland within the jurisdiction of the Scalholt bishop. He saith
also that a bishop hath power over churches and all their property,
and that laymen and unlearned men or those not clerks may not in any
way own them. Now, inasmuch as the laws of Holy Church witness that
a foul covenant and one contrary to right cannot be made good by the
right of ownership [long continued], and that which is at first of
no worth cannot afterwards stand for anything by reason of lapse of
time or prescription; and inasmuch as no bishop may lawfully alienate
from his successors the wardship of these glebes, and no layman may
any the more own them or make disposition thereof; and inasmuch as
no man may buy or sell a church for a price without great peril to
his soul, nor can he that getteth it so lawful hold it.

Upon such considerations the lord bishop Arne hath petitioned us that
we should adjudge away from Sighwat and his brethren, and also from
Einar Thorwald's son, the administration and all income and wardship
of [S. Nicholas church in] Oddestead and Olaf's church in Waterfrith,
with all that pertaineth thereto, and quash their defence, so that
afterwards neither they nor their heirs may have any claim upon the
aforesaid churches.

Now inasmuch as this case is come into our judgment, We give this
Sentence in the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost,
that the ownership and disposition, the administration and wardship
of [S. Nicholas kirk at] Oddestead and Olaf's kirk in Waterfrith,
with all that pertaineth thereto, whether it be taken or untaken,
profit or unprofitable, save that only which hath been used for
necessaries and reasonably therewithal, We adjudge to Arne bishop in
Scalholt and his lawful successors, to him and them in everlasting
possession. And we forbid Sighwat and his brethren, and their heirs
also, and Einar and his heirs, to make any claim in this case. This
letter was done at Bergen when there was passed from the birth of
our Lord Jesus Christ 1273 years, on S. James's vigil. In testimony
whereof we set our seal under this copy. Witness at Videy, a. 1518.


Sept. 14, 1297. The Settlement of the Glebe-case.

Eirek, by God's mercy king of Norway, son of king Magnus, sendeth to
all men, clerk and lay in Iceland, God's greeting and his. We do you
to wit that we have made peace with bishop Arne of Scalholt, and made
full accord with him touching the glebes and lands in the bishopric of
Scalholt, by counsel and consent of archbishop Iorund, that the glebes
in the bishopric of Scalholt which the churches possess altogether,
shall be under the bishop's administration. But those which laymen
own more than the half of, laymen shall hold it, being understood
that they shall pay those dues to the clerks which he that first
granted the land did appoint, and diminish nothing therefrom. Moreover
Scalholt's bishop shall visit every year every quarter of the land of
his bishopric, and ride no oftener to the same place before he have
ridden over all his diocese between. He shall ride from home after
Peter's-mass [July 29], and thence onward to harvest-tide as far as
the quarters go, and divide his visitation evenly.

Six priests swore with the bishop that this settlement should stand
without fail for himself and his successors after him for ever.

We bid you all to hold this as law, but he that shall do otherwise
will lie under risk of our wrath and punishment, and also bring upon
himself the pope's ban and God's wrath and the saints.

And in witness hereof archbishop Iorund and bishop Arne set
their seals, with our seal to this settlement. That was done at
Augwald's-ness the even of Cross-mass, in the 17th year of our
reign. Lord Finn sealed it. John the clerk wrote it.



This settlement is the foundation of the present state of the
Church Establishment in Iceland, and it has not been altogether
of good effect in modern times. The Church estates in Iceland fall
into two classes--the Church glebes or benefices, and those which
laymen own, but which pay for the support of the Church and are
called Thingabrand. Unfortunately it is precisely the great historic
estates--Herd-holt, Hwamm, Water-frith (won by the Church after the
settlement)--and others which were formerly the seats of rich and
powerful families, that have gone more or less to decay, owing to the
bad management of the glebes, for naturally the priest was not always
the best farmer, often he was the worst: and so these historic sites
have lost their former importance and influence. Husbandry has decayed
in consequence, because the man who had the means had not always
the will to improve his land and set a good example to his poorer
neighbours. There have been few Tussers in Iceland. Of course the
Reformation, with its changes often reckless, violent, and ill-judged,
and the consequent alien rule of the Icelandic Church from Denmark,
has also had its effect upon the condition of these glebes. Had the
best men been made priests and encouraged, things might be better
now in Iceland as in many other places.



The Later Genealogies appended to Landnáma-bóc.

In the introduction to Landnáma-bóc we promised to print later the
pedigrees inserted by the medieval copyists, which were eliminated
in editing Are's work.

The number of these pedigrees is not great in Hawk's and Sturla's
copies, but in Mela-book there are many (41), while as we know that
several pages of this vellum are missing and think it likely that
Thord missed out some in his transcription, one may reckon that it
once contained about 50.

Snorre Marcusson, whose pedigree is given in the Melamen's pedigree in
Sturlunga, vol. ii, p. 489, died about 1302, and must have completed
his copy about 1272, see Introduction to Landnáma-bóc. He brings his
pedigree down to his father and himself 'Snorre á Melum' (7), his
father's brethren, Thorleif (1) and Bodvar of By (1), his father's
sister Iarngerd (1), his wife Helga (11), his grandmother Snælaug
Marcus' mother (2), his mother Hallbera (14), Herdis, Bp. Paul's wife
(1).

Hawk, the son of Sir Erlend, the son of Olaf, being, as we believe,
baseborn, never traces pedigrees to himself or Olaf his grandfather,
but to his own wife Steinum (3), to Iungerd Erlend's wife (1), to
Iorun his own mother (1), to Walgerd his father's mother (7).

Doctor J. Thorkelin, Rector of Reykiavik School, thinks that Olaf
Erlend's father was the Olaf but twice spoken of in Sturlunga (1238
and 1240), and we accept this.

Sturla's pedigrees are traced to Gudny, mother of the Sturlungs (6),
and to Sturla of Hvamm (6).





I.

H. = Lawman Hawk's editorial pedigree insertions.

[Bk. I. 11. 2]. (f. Þórðar í Reykjaholte), f. Solva, f. Þórðar,
f. Magnus, f. Þórðar, f. Hoelgu, m. Guðnyjar, m. Sturlu ss. [1818]
Sigvatz ok Þórðar ok Snorra [Sun Sigvatz var Sturla], f. Þúriðar,
er Herra Rafn átte: þeirra born Ion korpr, Hallkatla, ok Valgerðr, ok
Þorgerðr. Syner Hallkotlo ok Ións Petrs sunar voro þeir Sturla ok Petr,
ok Steinunn dótter, er átte Guðmundr Þorsteins sun Skeggja-sonar.5

[II. 4. 14]. (m. Þorlaks ens Auðga), f. Þorleifs beiskalda,
f. Þorleiks, f. Ketils, f. Valgerðar, moðor þeirra Þorláks ok Þórðar.

[II. 15. 1]. Sun Skalla-Gríms var Egill, f. Þorsteins, f. Riflo,
f. Skúla, f. Þórðar, f. Boðvars, f. Þórðar prestz, f. Boðvars,
f. Þórðar, f. Iarngerðar er Herra Erlendr Sterke átte: þeirra
d. Valgerðr.10

[II. 20. 8]. (Hallr Gizorar sun Logmaðr); dotter Rafns var Steinunn,
m. Herra Rafns ok Hollu ok Herdísar [1819] er Svarthofði Dufgus
s. átti: þeirra sun Óli er átit Salgerðe Ións d.: þeirra d. Steinunn
er Haukr Erlendz son átti.

[II. 21. 1]. (m. Arnórs ok Eyvindar) f. Steingríms, f. Hoelgu,
m. Iorunnar, m. Hauks Erlendz sonar.15

[II. 22. 5]. See text.

[II. 22. 6]. See text.

[III. 11. 2]. f. Snorra, f. Steinunnar, m. Þorsteins Ranglatz,
f. Guðrúnar, m. Hollu, m. Flosa, f. Valgerðar, m. Herra Erlenz Sterka.

(Þorsteins Ranglatz), f. Guðrúnar, m. Hollu, m. Flosa, f. Valgerðar,
m. Herra5 Erlenz, f. Hauks.

[IV. 3. 1]. (At the end.) Flosi prestr átti Ragnilldi, d. Barkar
á Baugstoðom: þeirra born, Biarne ok Einarr, Halla, m. Herra
Kristophorus, ok Þórdís, m. frú Ingigerðar, m. frú Guðrúnar ok
Hallberu. Valgerðr var d. Flosa, m. Herra Erlenz Sterka, f. Hauks
ok Valgerðar.10

[IV. 3. 1]. [Iorundr Goði], f. Svartz [1820], f. Loðmundar, f. Sigfuss,
f. Sæmundar hins Fróða, f. Loptz, er átte Þóru, d. Magnús konungs
Berbeins, þeirra s. Jon, f. Sæmundar, ok Pals bps ok Sigurðar,
f. Jons í Áse, f. Salgerðar, m. Steinunnar [Hauk's wife].

[IV. 9. 1]. (Skegg-Brodda s.), þeirra ss. vóru þeir Kolbeinn, er
fyrr var nefndr,15 ok Biarne, f. Biarna, f. Flosa, f. Valgerðar,
m. Herra Erlenz, f. Hauks.

[IV. 11. 2]. (Errobeins stiúps), f. Gríms Glamaðz, f. Ingiallz,
f. Gríms, f. þeirra Barkar ok Einars, f. Hallkotlu, er átti Rafn
Sveinbiarnar s.: þeirra dd., Steinunn, m. Herra Rafns, ok Herdís,
m. Ála, f. Steinunnar, er Haukr Erlenz s. átte. Borkr Gríms s. var
f. Ragnhilldar, er Flosi Biarna s. átte. Þeirra born, Einarr,
ok Biarni,20 ok Valgerðr, m. herra Erlenz, f. Hauks. Þórdís var
ij d. Flosa, m. frú Ingigerðar, m. frú Guðrúnar, ok Hallberu
abbadísar. Halla var d. Flosa, m. herra Kristoforus.

[V. 16. 6]. (Cearvals  Ira  konungs), Þorodz  d. Goða var Hoelga,
m. Gríms Glomuðs, f. Ingiallz, f. Gríms, f. Barkar, f. Ragnilldar,
m. Valgerðar, m. herra Erlenz, f. Hauks.25

Mantissa, p. 271, ll. 15-19, see the text.

N.B. The Christne Saga has none.




II.

S. = Sturlu-book.  Editor's pedigree insertions.

[Bk. I. 11. 2]. (f. Þórðar í Reykjaholte), f. Solva, f. Þórðar,
f. Magnus, f. Þórðar, f. Helgu, m. Guðnýjar, m. Sturlu ss.

[II. 5. 8]. f. Þórdísar, m. Þórðar, f. Sturlu í Hvammi [ins Gamla,
H.].30

[II. 15. 10]. See text.

[II. 20. 2]. (Son Gils var Þórðr) hann átte Vígdíse Svertings d.:
þeirra s. var Sturla í Hvammi [Hvamm-Sturla, H.].

[II. 23. 2]. See text.

[III. 11. 2]. (m. Bótolfs), f. Þórdísar, m. Helgu, m. Guðnýjar,
m. Sturlu ss.35

[III. 15. 5]. (f. Svertings), f. Vígdísar, m. Sturlu í Hvammi
[Hvamm-Sturlu, H.].

[III. 16. 10]. (f. Þóríðar), m. Þórdísar, m. Vígdísar, m. Sturlu í
Hvammi [Hvamm-Sturlu, H.].

[IV. 3. 1]. (Hollu Iorundar d.): þeirra born voru þau Flosi prestr
ok Torfi prestr, Einarr Bruðr, ok Guðrún er Þórðr Sturlu s. átti, ok
Guðrún, er Einarr Bergþórs s.40 átte, ok Helga, m. Sigríðar Sigvatz d.

[IV. 12. 2]. (f. Guðrúnar), m. Þórdísar, m. Helgu, m. Guðnýjar,
m. Sturlu ss.

[IV. 14. 4]. (Ottars Hval-roar), f. Guðlaugar, m. Þorgerðar,
m. Iarngerðar, m. Valgerðar, m. Boðvars, f. Guðnýjar, m. Sturlu ss.

[IV. 14. 5, n.]. m. Liótz, f. Iarngerðar, m. Valgerðar, m. Boðvars,
f. Guðnýjar,45 m. Sturlu ss. (A whole suite is here interpolated.)

[IV. 17. 4]. (f. Botolfs), f. Þórdísar, m. Helgu, m. Guðnýjar,
m. Sturlu ss.




III.

M. = Mela-bók.  Pedigrees editorial, 41 insertions.

[Bk. V. 13. 2]. (Biarna ens spaka), f. Skeggja, f. Markus Logsogomannz,
f. Valgerðar, m. Boðvars, f. Þórðar prestz, f. Þorleifs í Gorðum,
ok Markus á Melum, ok Boðvars í Bæ.50

Log-skapti var f. Þorsteins holmundz (!), f. Gunnhildar, m. Iodísar
[1821], m. Vilborgar, m. Markus [1822], f. Snorra á Melum.

[V. 13. 5]. (m. Þorleifs Beiskalda), f. Alfgerðar [1823], m. Þorlaks,
f. Ketils prestz, f. Herdísar [1824], m. barna Póls biskops.

[V. 14. 7]. (Geirr Goðe), hann var f. Vígdísar, m. Þorsteins,
f. Botolfs, f. Þórdísar,5  m. Helgu, m. Þórðar prestz, f. Markus at
Melum, ok Þorbiarnar [? read Þorleifs] at Melum.

[V. 15. 2]. Oddr Hallkels s. var f. Iódísar, m. Vilborgar, m. Markus
[1825], f. Mela-Snorra.

[II. 3. 1]. (Vélaugo), Eyrlygs d. frá Esjuberge: þeirra d. Þóriðr,
m. Illuga hins10 Svarta, f. Hermundar, f. Hreins, f. Styrmis, f. Hreins
ábóta, f. Valdísar, m. Snorra á Melum, f. Hallberu, er Márkus Þórðar
s. átte.

[II. 4. 1]. (langa tíma) hans (Egils) son var Þorsteinn, f. Hriflu,
f. Egils, f. Skúla, f. Þorðar, f. Boðvars, f. Þórðar prestz, f. Markus
á Melum, ok ... Iarngerðar er herra Erlendr Sterki átte; þeirra
d. Valgerðr (M* citing 'Landnáma' in the margin; in15 t, compiled
out of M. and H., a slip of the lost leaf in H. then remaining).

[II. 4. 14]. (Þorláks ens Auðga), f. Ketils prestz, f. Helgu, er átte
Snorri Markusson á Melum.

[II. 5. 4]. Steinn Þorfinnz s. var f. Arnoru, m. Hallbiargar,
m. Oddnýjar, m. Geirlaugar, m. Snælaugar, m. Márkus á Melum.20

[II. 6. 4]. Hún (Hallveig) var m. Guðríðar, m. Biarnar, f. Steinunnar,
m. Ketils, f. Þorlaks, f. Ketils prestz, f. Helgu er Snorri Markusson
á.

[II. 10. 5]. Snorra Goda, f. Halldórs, f. Snorra, f. Guðrunar,
m. Hreins ábóta, f. Valdísar, m. Snorra, f. Hallberu, er átte Markus
á Melum.

[II. 15. 3]. (Illugi enn Svarte), f. Hermundar,  f. Hreins, f. Styrmis,
f. Hreins25 ábóta, f. Valdísar, m. Snorra, f. Hallberu, er Markus
Þórðar s. átte.

[II. 15. 4]. Þeirra d. var Guðríð, er átte Karlsefne: þeirra s. var
Biorn, f. Steinunnar, m. Ketils, f. Þorláks, f. Ketils prestz,
f. Helgu, er Snorri Markus s. átte.

[II. 16. 1]. f. Hallz, f. Yngvilldar, m. Guðnyjar, m. Þorleiks,
f. Þorleifs Beiskalda, f. Alfeiðar, m. Þorláks, f. Ketils prestz,
f. Helgu er Snorre Markus s. átte.30

[II. 17. 6]. Yri, m. Odda, f. Þorbiarnar, f. Þorgerðar, m. Odda,
f. Þorgils, f. Halberu, m. Hallz, f. Þuriðar, m. Hallberu, er átte
Márkus Þorðar s.

[II. 19. 1]. (Hnappraz), hans s. var Are er Reyknesingar eru frá
komnir, f. Þorgils, f. Ara, f. Hallberu, m. Þorgils, f. Hallberu,
m. Hallz [1826], f. Þuriðar, m. Hallberu er Markus Þorðar s. átti.35

[II. 21. 2]. (m. Coðraus), f. Herdísar, m. Alfeiðar, m. Þorlaks,
f. Ketils prestz, f. Helgu, er átte Snorri Markus s.

[III. 2. 3]. Son Eiðar einn het Þórhallr, f. Eiðs, f. Þorhalldz,
f. Oddnýjar, m. Geirlaugar, m. Snælaugar, m. Markus á Melum.

[III. 5. 3]. Þorkell Krafla var f. Arnórs, f. Ragneiðar, m. Orms,
f. Þorleiks,40 f. Þorleifs Beiskialda, f. Alfeiðar, m. Þorláks,
f. Ketils prestz [1827], f. Helgu er Snorri átte, Markus son.

[III. 6. 3]. Halldóra het d. Húnrauðar, m. Vigdísar,
m. Ulfheðins. f. Rafns, f. Hallberu, m. Valdísar, m. Snorra,
f. Hallberu er átti Markus Þórðar s. á Melum.

[III. 6. 6]. (f. Eyiolfs) Halta, f. Þorsteins, f. Guðmundar gási,
f. Eyjolfs, f. Guðlaugar,45 m. Ketils prestz, f. Helgu er átte Snorre
Markus s. á Melum.


Repeated 7. 1.

[III. 7. 4]. (f. Kolfinno), m. Hallberu, m. Hallz, f. Þuríðar,
m. Hallberu er átte Markus Þorðar s. á Melum.

[III. 11. 2]. Son Arnors (Biarnar [1828] s., Þoðar s.), var Elldiarn,
f. Hallz, f. Ragnhildar,50 m. Rafns, f. Hallberu, m. Valdísar,
m. Snorra, f. Hallberu, er átti Markus, Þórðar s. á Melum (by the
compiler inserted in a wrong place; it belongs to Arnorr Kerlingarnef,
and is repeated in its due place under Bard Sudreying (12. 3):
'þeirra s. var Eldiarn,' etc.).

[III. 14. 4]. (Þorsteins Ranglatz), f. Ketils, f. Þorláks, f. Ketils
prestz, f. Helgu er átte Snorri Markus s. á Melum.

[III. 15. 6]. (Þórarinn), f. Falka, f. Þórarens, f. Sígríðar,
m. Þórðar, f. Boðvars, f. Þorðar, f. Markus á Melum.

[III. 15. 8]. Einarr Auðunnar s. átte Valgerðe Runolfs d.; þeirra son
Eyjolfr, er5 átte Hallberu, Þóroddz [1829] d. hialms, ok bioggo þau
á Iórunnar-stoðum langa ævi, en síðan á Moðru-vollum: Hallfríðr var
d. Einars Eyjolfs s., m. Halldórs, f. Snorra, f. Guðrúnar, m. Hreins
ábóta, f. Valdísar, m. Snorra, f. Hallberu er átte Markus Þórðar s.

[III. 16. 2]. (Asolfs í Hofða), f. Odda, f. Gríms, f. Halldóru,
m. Markus, f. Valgerðar,10 m. Boðvars, f. Þórðar, f. Markus á Melum.

[III. 16. 5]. (Finnboga ens Ramma), f. Narfa, f. Ingvilldar,
m. Iodísar, m. Haullu, m. Yngvildar, m. Þorgilsar, f. Geirnyjar,
m. Valgerðar, m. Helgu er átte Snorri Markus s. á Melum.

[III. 19. 5]. (Hallberu), m. Valdísar, m. Snorra, f. Hallberu, er
átte Markus15 Þórðar s. á Melum.

[III. 22. 6]. (Laugarbrecku-Einarr), f. Hallveigar, m. Guðríðar,
m. Biarnar, f. Steinunnar, m. Ketils, f. Þorlaks, f. Ketils prestz,
f. Helgu, er átti Snorri Markus s. á Melum.

[IV. 1. 3]. (Þorsteinn enn Hvíti), hon var m. Þorgils, f. Helga,
f. Biarna, f. Yngvilldar,20 m. Amunda, f. Guðrúnar, m. Þórdísar,
m. Helgu, m. Þórðar prestz, f. Márkus á Melum.

[IV. 2. 3]. Gunnhilldr var m. [Gríms, f.] [1830] Halldóru, m. Márkúss,
f. Valgerðar, m. Boðvars, f. Þórðar prestz, f. Markus á Melum.

[IV. 3. 2]. Hans (Lytings) s. var Geitir, f. Þorkels, f. Ragneiðar,
m. Hollu,25 m. Bótolfs, f. Þórdísar, m. Helgu, m. Þórðar prestz,
f. Markus á Melum.

[IV. 4. 2]. Ioreiðr var d. Þiðranda, m. Þorsteins, f. Guðríðar,
m. Rannveigar, m. Salgerðar, m. Guðrúnar, m. Hreins ábóta, f. Valdísar,
m. Snorra, f. Hallberu, er átte Markus Þorðar s. á Melum.

[IV. 5. 3]. (dætr iii), Yngvildr var ein, hun var m. Þorsteins,
f. Ámunda, f. Guðrúnar,30 m. Þórdísar, m. Helgu, m. Þórðar prestz,
f. Markus á Melum.

[IV. 6. 3]. (Sveinbiarnar), f. Þorsteins, f. Botolfs, f. Þórdísar,
m. Helgu, m. Þórðar prestz, f. Márkus á Melum.

[IV. 12. 2]. (f. Goðrúnar), m. Þórdísar, m. Helgu, m. Þórðar prestz,
f. Markus á Melum.35

[IV. 14. 5 n.]. (f. Guðnýjar, m. Sturlu ss.) ok f. Þórðar prestz,
f. Márkus á Melum.

[IV. 16. 1]. (Loðmundar ens Gamla), Þórðr het son Surtz or Kirkjubæ,
f. Guðrúnar, m. Þóru, m. Þorsteins holmunz, f. Gunnhildar, m. Iódísar,
m. Vilborgar, m. Magnús, f. Snorra, f. Hallberu, er átte Márkus Þórðar
s. á Melum.

[IV. 16. 3]. Hann (Eysteinn) var f. Þorkels, f. Þorsteins frá
Keldu-Gnúpe, f. Þoríðar,40 m. Alofar, m. Guðrúnar, m. Þorvalldz,
f. Ingiríðar, m. Ástríðar, m. Ingibiargar, m. Þuríðar, m. Hallberu,
er átte Markus Þórðar s. á Melum.

[IV. 19. 1]. Þóra Steins d., m. Surtz [1831], var m. Þorsteins,
f. Gunnhildar, m. Iódísar, m. Vilborgar, m. Magnus, f. Snorra,
f. Hallberu er átte Markus Þorðar s. á Melum.












INDEX.



I. NAMES OF PERSONS.

Names of settlers are printed in italics; Celtic settlers have
a star before their name. The references are to book, ch.,
and paragraph (II. 5. 6 = Landnáma, Book II, ch. 5, paragr. 6),
where possible; otherwise to page (and line). Gen. = Genealogies,
pp. 237-52. Th. = the Thorsness Settlement, pp. 252-66. Mant. =
Mantissa, pp. 266-77. Lib. = Libellus, pp. 287-306. Nj. = Njal,
pp. 364-8. Cr. = Cristne Saga, pp. 376-406. Thorv. = Thorwald,
pp. 407-12. Hv. = Hungrvaca, pp. 425-58. Þorl. = Þorláks Saga,
pp. 458-502. Pol. = Póls Saga, pp. 502-34. Io. = Ioans Saga,
pp. 535-67. Od. = Oddaverja-Þáttr, pp. 569-91. Gm. = Godmund,
pp. 606-15. Ch. = Charters, pp. 630-8. Abbreviations: b. =
brother. d. = daughter. f. = father. s. = son. m. = mother. w. =
wife. For names not under K see C.






A

Abraham, an Armenian (Greek?) bishop, Mant. 6. 1: Lib. 8. 2.

Absalon, archbishop of Lund, Pol. 3. 2; 7. 3; 14. 5; 15. 2.

Adalbert, archbishop of Bremen, Hv. 1. 3; 1. 5: Io. 1. 2. (See also
Albertus.)

Adam (the first man), I. 3. 6.

Adrianus II, Pope in Rome, I. 1. 1.

Aðisl at Uppsala, Lib. 306. 9.

Agnar Ragnarsson Loðbrókar, Mant. 5. 1.

Agne, early king, Lib. 306. 7.

Áláfr Cvaran, see Óleifr.

Albertus, bishop of Bremen, Mant. 3. 2: Cr. 3. 1. (See also Adalbert.)

Aldís Conalsdótter en Barreyska, II. 15. 14: V. 13. 1: Gen. B. 1.

Aldís (al. Ásdís) Ófeigsdótter Grettis, V. 4. 5; 13. 2.

Áleifr, see Óleifr.

Alexander, s. of Leo VI, Byzantine emperor, I. 1. 1.

Alexander III, Pope, Þorl. 8. 1.

Alexius, Byzantine emperor, Lib. 10. 12: Hv. 2. 16.

Alfarenn (al. Alfvarenn) Valason ens Sterka, II. 5. 9; 7. 1; 7. 3.

Álfdís Gamladótter, III. 1. 2.

Álfeiðr Rúnolfsdótter, Gen. B. 14.

Álfeiðr, m. of Þórðr Freysgoðe, IV. 15. 3.

Álfeiðr Þórleifsdótter, p. 641. 3, 30, &c.

Álfgeirr of Álfgeirsvellir, III. 7. 5.

Álfgeirr Suðreyingr, II. 7. 5.

Álfgerðr Þórormsdótter, V. 13. 5.

Álfr enn Egðske Grímolfsson, V. 16. 5-6.

Álfr í Daolom Eysteinsson Meinfrets, II. 5. 4; 15. 7; 15. 11; 19. 3;
21. 1: III. 1. 1: Gen. B. 11-12: Lib. 5. 1.

Álfr or Ostu, f. of Eysteinn Meinfretr, II. 15. 10: III. 1. 1.

Álfr af Vors, II. 5. 6.

Álftfirðingar, Th. 9. 3.

Alfvarenn, see Alfarenn.

Álof Árbót, d. of King Haraldr enn Hárfagre, IV. 14. 1.

Álof Ásbiarnardótter, Gen. B. 16.

Álof Baoðvarsdótter af Vors, V. 14. 5: Gen. A. 13-14: B. 6-7:
Mant. 5. 1: Cr. 7. 1.

Álof, w. of Earl Ásbiaorn Skerjablese, d. of Þórdr Vagg-agðe, V. 15. 1.

Álof Bitro-Oddadótter, Gen. B. 11.

Álof Elliða-skiaoldr Ófeigsdótter, I. 10. 7: III. 2. 3: V. 3. 4.

Álof Eyjolfsdótter, Od. 4. 2.

Álof, m. of Finnr Laogsaogomaðr, V. 16. 10.

Álof Goðmundardótter, II. 15. 96: Gen. B. 2.

Álof Ingolfsdótter, II. 28. 5.

Álof Ozurardótter, Gen. B. 15.

Álof Ragnarsdótter Loðbrókar, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5: Mant. 5. 1.

Álof Snorradótter Goða, Gen. B. 13.

Álof Þórgrímsdótter, II. 16. 2.

Álof Þóríðardótter, p. 642. 40.

Álof Þórsteinsdótter Baoðvarssonar, Gen. B. 15.

Álof Þórsteinsdótter Rauðs. II. 14. 1; 14. 5.

Alrekr, early king, Lib. 306. 7.

Alrekr Hrappsson, IV. 1. 4.

Alrekr Þórmóðarson, III. 12. 7.

Ámunde Árnason, smith, Pol. 5. 2; 9. 2; 15. 3.

Ámunde Goðmundarson, Ch. 635.

Ámunde Þórgeirsson, II. 22. 6.

Ámunde Þórsteinsson Síðo-Hallssonar, IV. 12. 2.

Án Arnarson Hyrno, IV. 12. 1; 13. 1: (cf. Gen. B. 16).

Án Bogsveiger, II. 22. 1: III. 5. 1: Gen. B. 5.

Án of Hraun, II. 8. 5.

Án of Kirkiofell, II. 8. 5.

Án enn Ramme, IV. 10. 1.

Án Rauðfeldr Grímsson Loðinkinna, II. 22. 2-4.

Án Þóresson or Garðe, III. 20. 2.

Anacletus II, Pope, Hv. 4. 11: Þorl. 1. 1.

Áne of Ána-brecka, II. 4. 8.

Áne Ávallzon, II. 13. 1.

Are Biarnarson, Pol. 15. 2.

Are, follower of Egill Colsson, V. 7. 7.

Are Eyjolfsson, Od. 4. 2.

Are Loðmundarson, IV. 19. 3.

Are Mársson á Reykjahólum, II. 2. 1; 6. 5; 11. 7; 15. 11; 19. 1-3:
V. 4. 6: Gen. A. 38: B. 11-12, 14: Cr. 1. 2.

Are Súrsson, II. 22. 8.

Are Þióðarsson, III. 11. 4.

Are Þórgilsson enn Fróðe, II. 12. 6: V. 11. 6; 17. 1: Gen. A. 36:
B. 14: Th. 7. 4: Lib. 306. 18: Cr. 9. 2; 10. 2; 10. 8: Pol. 14. 6:
Io. 6. 1.

Are Þórgilsson af Reykjanese, Gen. B. 10. 15: p. 641. 34.

Are Þórgilsson enn Sterke, Gen. B. 14.

Are (al. Án) Þórsteinsson Cleggia, IV. 9. 1.

Are Þórvarzson, III. 15. 8: Pol. 6. 3.

Arenbiorn herser or Fiaorðom, II. 2. 1: III. 13. 2.

Arenbiorn herser Þóresson, II. 2. 1.

Arna (?) Þórkelsdótter, Mant. 1. 7.

Arnalldr, bishop of Greenland, Mant. 6. 1.

Arnalldr, b. of Sæmundr enn Suðreyske, III. 5. 12.

Arnalldr Sæmundarson ens Suðreyska, III. 7. 1; 11. 2.

Arnaldus, patriarch of Jerusalem, Lib. 10. 12: Cr. 10. 9. (See also
Arnhallr.)

Arnbiaorg Campa-Grímsdótter, II. 15. 13: III. 17. 3.

Arnbiaorg of Arnbiargarlækr, II. 3. 5.

Arnbiaorg Haofða-Þórðardótter, III. 11. 2.

Arnbiaorg Ráðormsdótter, IV. 17. 4: V. 9. 8.

Arnbiaorn Ásbrannzson or Breiðavík, II. 11. 6.

Arnbiaorn (al. Árinbiaorn) Óleifsson Lang-hals, II. 3. 7: IV. 3. 1;
8. 2.

Arnbiaorn  Slétto- or Sleito-Biarnarson, II. 15. 9: III. 9. 2; 11. 2.

Arndís en Auðga Steinolfsdótter, II. 18. 1; 30. 2: Gen. B. 9.

Arndís Geirmundardótter Heljarskinns, Gen. B. 9. 11.

Arndís Heðinsdótter, III. 9. 1.

Arndís Styrbiarnardótter, III. 6. 6.

Arndís Þórkelsdótter, III. 21. 2.

Arne, master-smith, Hv. 5. 5.

Arne Arnason, Gen. B. 13.

Arne Arnmóðsson, Gen. B. 13.

Arne Biarnarson, priest, Hv. 3. 12.

Arne Magnússon, Ch. 635.

Arne Torfuson, I. 7. 5.

Arne Þórláksson, bishop of Skálholt, II. 22. 6: Ch. 637-8.

Arneiðr Ásbiarnardótter Skerja-Blesa, IV. 4. 2: V. 15. 1.

Arnfríðr Slétto-Biarnardótter, III. 9. 2.

Arngeirr enn Austræne, III. 18. 1.

Arngeirr Bersason, II. 4. 3; 30. 1.

Arngeirr Hvasse Þórmóðarson, III. 12. 7.

Arngeirr á Slétto, III. 22. 3-4.

Arngeirr Spak-Baoðvarsson, Cr. 2. 3.

Arngerðr Ásbrannzdótter, V. 13. 6.

Arngerðr Skíðadótter, III. 12. 7.

Arngerðr Þórbiarnardótter, II. 18. 2; 28. 1.

Arngerðr Þórkelsdótter, I. 6. 6.

Arngrímr Goðmundarson, I. 7. 5.

Arngrímr Goðe Helgason, II. 3. 2.

Arngrímr Sæbiarnarson Goða, V. 4. 7.

Arngrímr Þórsteinsson, V. 11. 3.

Arngunnr Hámundardótter, IV. 7. 2, 15. 1: Gen. A. 5.

Arngunnr Þórsteinsdótter Dranga-karls, V. 7. 2.

Arnhallr (= Arnaldus), patriarch of Jerusalem, Hv. 2. 16.

Arni, see Arne.

Arnis ábóte Biarnarson Enska, II. 22. 6.



Arnkatla, w. of Helge Eyþjófsson, II. 22. 3.

Arnkatla Þórðardótter, II. 15. 8.

Arnkatla Þórsteinsdótter, IV. 19. 3.

Arnkell Goðe Þórólfsson Bægifótz, II. 7. 6; II. 5-6; Th. 8. 3.

Arnlaugr í Arnlaugsfirðe, II. 12. 9.

*Arnleif, sister of Svart-cell, I. 6. 5.

Arnleif Haofða-Þórðardótter, III. 11. 2.

Arnleif Illogadótter Ramma, II. 11. 7.

Arnleif Þórðardótter Gellis, II. 11. 7.

Arnliótr Þóroddzson Hialms, III. 14. 19.

Arnmóðr, ancestor of the Arnmoeðlingar, Gen. B. 13.

Arnmóðr enn Gamle Þórgrímsson, II. 15. 10.

Arnmóðr Heðinsson, III. 3. 1.

Arnmóðr iarl Nereiðsson, V. 16. 4.

Arnmódr enn Rauðe Þórbiarnarson, II. 20. 9; 21. 3.

Arnmóðr enn Skiálge Þórkellsson, III. 7. 4.

Arnoddr Óláfsson Becks, III. 12. 6.

Arnoddr Slétto-Biarnarson, III. 9. 2.

Arnóra Gunnbiarnardótter, II. 15. 7.

Arnóra Laugarbrecko-Einarsdótter, II. 6. 5; 15. 4 (erroneously called
Lón-Einarsdótter).

Arnóra Steinsdótter, p. 641. 19.

Arnóra Þórðardótter Gellis, II. 17. 8.

Arnóra Þórgeirsdótter ens Óða, III. 12. 4.

Arnórr Arndísarson, Thorv. 5.

Arnórr, f. of Ásbiaorn, II. 6. 5: Cr. 10. 10.

Arnórr, s. of Birna, II. 21. 1.

Arnórr enn Góðe Steinolfsson Rauðæingr, III. 14. 4.

Arnórr Herlaugsson, V. 16. 9.

Arnórr Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

Arnórr Hýnefr Þóroddzson, III. 1. 2.

Arnórr Kerlingar-nef Biarnarson, III. 11. 2; 12. 3: Cr. 1. 2; p. 414.

Arnórr Nafar-Helgason, III. 12. 2.

Arnórr Ornolfsson, IV. 18. 6.

Arnórr Skefilsson í Gaongo-Skarðe, III. 12. 2.

Arnórr Þóresson, III. 15. 10.

Arnórr Þórgrímsson, III. 21. 1.

Arnórr Þórkelsson kraoflo, p. 641. 40.

Arnríðr Heðinsdótter, III. 18. 1.

Arnsteinn in Axefirth, p. 320.

Arnsteinn Goðe Ketilsson, III. 22. 2.

Arnþiófr í Cryso-vík, V. 16. 10.

Arnþóra Þórsteinsdótter Tialdstæðings, V. 8. 6.

Arnþórr the Eastman, Od. 6. 5.

Arnþrúðr Arenbiarnardótter, II. 2. 1.

Ása Hrólfsdótter Rauðskeggs, see Æsa.

Ásbiaorg (al. Ásborg) Oddzdótter, V. 7. 9.

Ásbiaorn, f. of Álof, Gen. B. 16.

Ásbiaorn Arnórsson, II. 6. 5: Cr. 10. 10.

Ásbiaorn enn Auðge Harðarson, II. 2. 4; 15. 3: III. 2. 3.

Ásbiaorn Auðunnarson, II. 8. 5.

Ásbiaorn Detti-áss Eyvindarson, III. 16. 5.

Ásbiaorn Heyangrs-Biarnarson, IV. 15. 1; 15. 3: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 25.

Ásbiaorn Hrafnkelsson, IV. 6. 3.

Ásbiaorn Ketilsson ens Fiflska, II. 21. 1: IV. 16. 1 (= Gen. A. 23,
Ásbiaorn Þórsteinsson Ketilssonar?).

Ásbiaorn Loðinhaofðe, IV. 5. 4: Cr. 8. 7.

Ásbiaorn Myrkárskalle Hrossbiarnarson, Gen. A. 33.

Ásbiaorn Ófeigsson Grettis, V. 4. 5.

Asbiaorn Ozararson, V. 16. 12.

Asbiaorn Reyrketilsson, V. 3. 6.

Ásbiaorn iarl Skeria-Blese, IV. 4. 2: V. 15. 1.

Ásbiaorn Vodve Ceallacsson, II. 16. 1-2.

Ásbiaorn Þórarensson, IV. 5. 4.

Ásbiaorn Þórsteinsson, Gen. A. 23: Cr. 4. 3.

Ásbirningar, Gen. B. 13.

Ásborg, see Ásbiaorg.

Ásbrandr at Kambe í Breiðavík, II. 7. 2; 11. 6.

Ásbrandr Narfason, III. 12. 10-11.

Ásbrandr, f. of Þórbrandr, Gen. A. 11.

Ásbrandr Þórbrannzson Harallzsonar Hrings, III. 3. 1.

Ásbrandr Þórbrandzson Þórbiarnarsonar ens Óarga, V. 13. 6.

Ásdís Bárðardótter, II. 7. 2.

Ásdís Knattardótter, I. 7. 2.

Ásdís Ófeigsdótter, see Aldís.

Ásdís Þórgrímsdótter (al. Þórmóðsdótter), II. 23. 2; 24. 1-2.

Áse herser Ingiallzson, II. 5. 1: V. 11. 4.

Áse herser, f. of Veðrar-Grímr, II. 14. 3.

Ásgautr Ásmundarson, V. 9. 10: Cr. 8. 2.

Ásgeirr Auðunnarson Ásgeirssonar, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 4.

Ásgeirr Austmanna-skelmer, V. 12. 2.

Ásgeirr Ceartansson, II. 5. 9.

Ásgeirr Cneif Oleifsson, V. 3. 2-3: Io. 1. 1.

Ásgeirr Erpsson, II. 15. 7.

Ásgeirr Gizorarson, Hv. 2. 19.

Ásgeirr Grímsson, V. 12. 4.

Ásgeirr of Hamar, II. 3. 4.

Ásgeirr Knattarson í Vatz-firðe, II. 15. 9 b; 18. 2: III. 6. 4:
Gen. B. 2: Cr. 1. 2.

Ásgeirr Rauðfeldr Herjolfsson, III. 14. 6; 14. 10-11.

Ásgeirr, the slayer of Sámr Barkarson, II. 10. 5.

Ásgeirr Ulfsson, V. 14. 7: Gen. A. 14.

Ásgeirr Vestarsson of Eyre, II. 8. 1; 9. 4; 10. 4: Th. 7. 2-3; 9. 3.

Ásgeirr Æðe-collr Auðunnarson (al. Onundarson Tréfótar), II. 15. 9;
15. 14; 29. 1: III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 4-5.

Ásgerðr Asksdótter ens Ómálga, I. 10. 7: V. 3. 3-5: Gen. A. 8-9; 11.

Ásgerðr Biarnardótter, II. 4. 1.

Ásgerðr Haofða-Þórðardótter, III. 11. 2.

Ásgerðr Ketilsdótter ens Áuðga, V. 3. 6.

Ásgerðr Oddzdótter Mióva, V. 9. 4.

Ásgrímr Elliða-Grímsson, III. 15. 5: V. 7. 8: Gen. A. 13: Cr. 1. 2;
8. 3: p. 312.

Ásgrímr Ondóttzson Kráko, III. 15. 2-5: Gen. A. 13.

Ásgrímr Ulfsson, V. 8. 1-2.

Ásgrímr Þórhallzson, Mant. 1. 7.

Áshildr, w. of Óláfr Tvennumbrúne, V. 12. 3-4.

Áskell, archbishop of Lund, Hv. 4. 9; 5. 3; 5. 12.

Áskell Goðe Eyvindarson (al. Ketilsson Haorðska), III. 19. 1; 19. 4:
V. 17. 4.

*Áskell Hnocan Dufþaksson (al. Dofnials son), IV. 17. 5: V. 9. 10
(Ásgeirr).

Áskell Olmóðsson ens Gamla, Gen. B. 15-16.

Áskell Ormsson ens Auðga, V. 9. 5.

Áskell Ósvífsson, Cr. 3. 6.

Áskell Tiorfe (al. Torfe), III. 17. 4.

Áskell Þóresson, III. 17. 2.

Áskr enn Ómálge, V. 3. 3-4: Gen. A. 8 (Áse, Ar).

Áslákr Aurgoðe Hrafnsson, IV. 17. 5; 18. 3; 18. 4.

Áslákr Bifra-Káre Ánarson, IV. 13. 1: Gen. B. 16 (Arnarson).

Áslákr Fitja-skalle Áskelsson, Gen. B. 15-16.

Áslákr Þórbergsson (al. Hróarsson) of Langadale, II. 6. 4; 11. 7;
12. 2; 13. 1: Th. 9. 3.

Áslaug Sigurðardótter Fáfnesbana, Gen. B. 12: Mant. 5. 1.

Áslaug Sigurðardótter Orms-í-Auga, Mant. 5. 2.

Ásleif Þórgilsdótter, V. 9. 3; 9. 6.

Ásleikr Biarnarson Iárnsíðo, III. 11. 1.

Ásmundr Áskelsson Hnocans, V. 9. 10.

Ásmundr Atlason, II. 5. 9-10.

Ásmundr under Gnúpe, III. 5. 2; 5. 6.

Ásmundr Hæro-langr Þórgrímsson, II. 29. 1: III. 20. 2: Gen. B. 4-5.

Ásmundr, f. of Már, II. 21. 1.

Ásmundr Ondóttzson Kráko, III. 15. 2-5; 20. 1.

Ásmundr Ozurarson, IV. 3. 8.

Ásmundr Skegglauss Ófeigsson, V. 4. 5.

Ásmundr Sveinbiarnarson, V. 16. 12.

Ásmundr Þórfinnsson, II. 21. 1.

Ásmundr, s. of Þórgerðr Þórbiarnardótter, II. 4. 13.

Ásmundr Þórgestzson, II. 11. 8.

Ásný Flosadótter, V. 9. 1-2.

Ásný Vestarsdótter, V. 4. 5; 4. 7.

Ásný Víga-Sturlodótter, II. 20. 2; 23. 2.

*Ásolfr Alscic Conalsson, I. 7. 3-6.

Ásolfr Flose Vemundarson í Haofða, II. 15. 11: III. 16. 2 (Verm-);
17. 3: IV. 2. 3.

Ásolfr, f. of Goðrún, II. 21. 1.

Ásta Goðbrannzdótter Kúlo, m. of St. Óláfr, II. 29. 1: III. 4. 1:
Gen. B. 5: Mant. 5. 1.

Ástríðr Eiríksdótter, m. of King Óláfr Tryggvason, Gen. B. 5-6:
Mant. 5. 1: Cr. 7. 1.

Ástríðr Hrolfsdótter hersess, II. 9. 4; 7. 3.

Ástríðr Hrútzdótter, II. 15. 10.

Ástríðr Ingiríðardótter, p. 642. 40.

Ástríðr Mannvitz-brecka Móðolfsdótter, IV. 7. 3; 15. 6.

Ástríðr Sloeki-drengr Bragadótter, II. 2. 1.

Ástríðr Sveinsdótter, m. of King Svein of Denmark, Io. 2. 1; 2. 2.

Ástríðr Vígfússdótter, m. of Eirekr á Ofro-staoðom ( = next?),
Gen. B. 6.

Ástríðr Vígfússdótter af Vors, III. 14. 4: Mant. 5. 1.

Ástríðr Þórgeirsdótter, III. 3. 1.

Ástríðr Þórvallzdótter Holbarka, IV. 5. 4.

Ásvalldr, see Ósvaldr.

Ásvalldr Ulfsson, II. 12. 1; 28. 3.

Ásvaor Brynjolfsdótter, IV. 4. 3.

Ásvaor Herjolfsdótter, IV. 5. 4.

Ásvaor Oddbiarnardótter, V. 4. 3.

Ásvaor Ófeigsdótter, V. 4. 5.

Ásvaor Þóresdótter, IV. 3. 1: Gen. A. 28.

Atle or Atleyjo, II. 5. 5.

Atle Ásmundarson Atlasonar, II. 5. 10.

Atle Ásmundarson Hæro-langs, Gen. B. 5.

Atle, a freedman of Geirmundr Heljarskinn, II. 17. 6; 25. 1.



Atle Hásteinsson, V. 11. 2; 12. 2.

Atle Haognason, II. 22. 5.

Atle Haoscullzson, II. 22. 5.

Atle Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

Atle Illingr, III. 14. 6.

Atle iarl enn Mióve, I. 3. 2: V. 11. 1-2; 17. 2: Mant. 5. 2.

Atle prestr, Pol. 5. 2.

Atle enn Ramme Eilífsson, III. 6. 6; 11. 2: Gen. A. 32: Cr. 1. 1:
Thorv. 5-6.

Atle enn Rauðe Ulfsson, II. 12. 1; 19. 1; 19. 5; 20. 2: Gen. A. 38.

Atle Skíðason ens Gamla, III,  6. 6; 7. 4.

Atle Tannason, II. 18. 1.

Atle Valason, II. 5. 9.

Atle Þórðarson, II. 11. 5.

Auðolfr á Auðolfs-staoðom, III. 6. 1-2.

Auðolfr at Bægisá, III. 14. 19.

Auðr en Diupauðga Ketilsdotter, I. 4. 5: II. 14. 1-15. 7; 15. 11-15:
V. 17. 2; 17. 5: Gen. A. 35 (Uðr en Diúpúðga): Th. I. 1; 1. 4; 5. 2;
6. 3: Lib. 2. 1; 305. 15.

Auðr Eyvindardótter, IV. 18. 2: Gen. A. 4; 10 (Unnr), 25 (Uðr).

Auðr Ívarsdótter Víðfaðma, Gen. A. 1.

Auðr Óláfsdótter Iafna-collz, II. 22. 5.

Auðr Vésteinsdótter, w. of Gisle Súrsson, II. 22. 3; 22. 7-8.

Auðr, w. of Þórarenn Svarte of Mávahlíð, II. 7. 6.

Auðr Rauðsson, I. 10. 5.

Auðunn Ásgeirsson á Ásgeirs-á, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 4.

Auðunn Ásgeirsson Auðunnarsonar, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 4.

Auðunn Geit, earl, III. 15. 2.

Auðunn Ketilsson Einhenda, V. 9. 3; 9. 6.

Auðunn enn Rauðe, IV. 14. 6.

Auðunn Rotinn Þórólfsson Smiors, III. 15. 8: Gen. A. 32.

Auðunn Skaokoll Biarnarson, III. 4. 1; 5. 15: V. 17. 2: Gen. B. 4-5;
Mant. 5. 1.

Auðunn Smiðkelsson, I. 10. 2: II. 2. 2.

Auðunn Stode (or Stote) Valason, II. 5. 9; 8. 1; 8. 3-5.

Auðunn Þórðarson, I. 7. 1.

Auðunn Þunn-carr, V. 9. 3.

Augurr í Camba-kisto Hroðgeirsson, V. 11. 5.

Aun enn Gamle, Lib. 306. 8.

Ávallde Ingiallzson, see Skegg-Ávallde.

Ávalldr Ongt-í-brióste, II. 13. 1.

*Avangr, an Irish settler, I. 7. 1.

Axlhegingar, III. 8. 4.





B


Baldvini, King of Jerusalem, Lib. 10. 2: Cr. 10. 9: Hv. 2. 16.

Balke Blængsson, I. 9. 2: II. 4. 3; 30. 1: III. 1. 1; 20. 5.

Ballæringar, Gen. B. 13.

Barðe Guðmundarson, see Víga-Barðe.

Bárðr í Ál Ketilsson, III. 6. 6: Gen. A. 32: Cr. 1. 1.

Bárðr Atlason enn Svarte (al. Haoscollzson), II. 20. 8; 22. 5.

Bárðr Báreksson, V. 3. 7.

Bárðr Bláskeggr, see Baorkr Blátannar-skegg.

Bárðr Blaondo-horn, V. 3. 3.

Bárðr, s. of Cecilia, II. 22. 6.

Bárðr Collason, II. 7. 2.

Bárðr Herjolfsson, II. 12. 7: V. 16. 11.

Bárðr Haofða-Þórðarson, III. 11. 2.

Bárðr Haoscullzson, II. 15. 8: Gen. A. 35.

Bárðr Iaokulsson, III. 5. 13.

Bárðr Ormsson, V. 15. 2.

Bárðr Suðreyingr, III. 12. 3.

Bárðr Þórgeirsson at Mosfelle, V. 14. 7.

Bárðr Þórleifsson, I. 7. 5.

Barðverjar, III. 12. 4.

Bárekr, f. of Bárðr, V. 3. 7.

Bárekr Sighvatzson, V. 5. 2.

Barna-Þóroddr Ormsson, III. 14. 12.

*Baugr Rauðsson, V. 4. 4; 7. 1-2: Gen. 5.

Baugssyner, V. 7. 1-2 (see Gunnarr, Eyvindr, Sniall-Steinn).

Beadmacr (al. Maddaðr) King of the Irish, II. 8. 5.

*Becan á Becans-staoðom, I. 7. 9.

Beda the venerable. Prolog.

Beinir Hialtason, II. 15. 7.

Beinir Mósson (Mársson), II. 6. 2: V. 13. 4.

Beinir Sigurðarson, Hv. 5. 13.

Benedikt, b. of King Knut, Hv. 2. 20.

Beolan, Scottish King, II. 9. 3.

Bera Egilsdótter Skalla-Grímssonar, V. 16. 6: Cr 1. 5.

Bera Iátmundardótter ens Helga, Gen. A. 32.

Bera Ormsdótter, Cr. 1. 5.

Bera Yngvarsdótter, II. 4. 12.

Berðlo-Káre Vemundarson, I. 8. 1: IV. 3. 6.

Berfirðingar, IV. 11. 6.

Bergdís Geirsdótter, I. 9. 6.

Bergdís, wife of Grímr Ingiallzson, II. 5. 1.

Bergliót Þóresdótter, m. of Hákon iarl enn Ríke, IV. 14. 1.



Bergr Gliro-Hallason, III. 22. 1.

Bergr Gunnsteinsson, Gm. 612.

Bergr Vésteinsson, II. 23. 1.

Bergr Vígfússon, III. 14. 4: Mant. 5. 1.

Bergr Þórmóðarson, II. 11. 7.

Bergþóra Colgrímsdótter, I. 7. 7.

Bergþóra Hrútzdótter, II. 15. 10.

Bergþóra Óleifsdótter Pá, II. 15. 9 b: Gen. B. 2.

Bergþóra Skarpheðinsdótter, Gen. A. 8: Nj. 367.

Bergþórr Buckr Sveinsson, Gen. B. 16.

Bergþórr Brynjolfsson, V. 9. 3.

Bergþórr Collzson, I. 6. 5; 11. 2.

Bergþórr Hrafnsson, Laogsaogomaðr, Lib. 10. 8-10: Cr. 10. 7: Hv. 3. 13.

Bergþórr Þórláksson, II. 8. 1.

Berse, s. of Dagrún, V. 6. 3.

Berse Dalcsson, Gen. B. 10.

Berse Goðlauss Balkason, II. 4. 3; 30. 1.

Berse Halldórsson, f. of Þórmóðr Colbrúnarskáld, II. 26. 1.

Berse Halldórsson, priest, Pol. 15. 2.

Berse Ozorarson, IV. 5. 2.

Berse (= Brese) Þórmóðarson, I. 7. 2; 10. 1; 11. 1.

Biaðuch Cearvalsson, Gen. B. 15.

Bialfe (al. Bialke) a freedman of Ásgerðr Asksdótter, Gen. A. 11.

Biargey Valbrannzdótter, II. 24. 8; 26. 1.

Biarnarðr, see Biarnharðr.

Biarne Bergþórsson, p. 593.

Biarne Biarnason, IV. 3. 1.

Biarne Brodd-Helgason, III. 8. 1: IV. 3. 1: Gen. A. 26; 28.

Biarne Flosason, IV. 3. 1.

Biarne Hallkelsson, V. 15. 2.

Biarne Húslangr Skegg-Broddason, IV. 3. 1: Mant. 4. 1-2.

Biarne Kolbeinsson, bishop of Orkney, Pol. 13. 1.

Biarne enn Spake Þórsteinsson, V. 7. 9; 13. 2: Lib. 10. 2.

Biarne Sturloson, II. 1. 1-2.

Biarne Þórbrannzson, II. 7. 2.

Biarneyja-Ketill, III. 22. 2.

Biarnharðr enn Bókvíse Vilráðsson, foreign bishop, Mant. 6. 1-2:
Lib. 8. 1: Hv. 1. 11.

Biarnharðr enn Saxneske, foreign bishop, Mant. 6. 1-2: Lib. 8. 1:
Hv. 1. 11.

Biarnheðinn prestr Sigurðarson, in Kirk­jobæ, I. 7. 11: Hv. 5. 13:
Þorl. 5. 1; 6. 1-2: Ch. 631.

Biartmar iarl: II. 22. 2.

Biartmar Ánarson, II. 22. 3-4.

Biolan Vilbaldsson, IV. 17. 5.

Biólfr, sworn brother of Loðmundr Gamle, IV. 9. 2; 10. 1.

Biolloc Vilbaldsdótter, IV. 17. 5.

Biaorg Eyvindardótter Austmannz, II. 19. 1.

Biaorg Ísolfsdótter, IV. 18. 3.

Biaorn, abbot of Thverá, Þorl. 15. 2.

Biaorn enn Auðge Geirleifsson, III. 14. 14.

Biaorn Austmaðr, II. 7. 5.

Biaorn enn Austræne Ketilsson, I. 4. 5: II. 9. 1-3; 14. 6; 16. 1;
17. 6: V. 17. 2: Gen. B. 3; 10: Th. 1. 1; 2. 1-3; 3. 2; 5. 1-2;
6. 1-3; 7. 3; 9. 2.

Biaorn í Biarnarfirðe, II. 20. 7; 29. 2.

Biaorn Blá-taonn, IV. 13. 3.

Biaorn Baolverksson Blindinga-trióno, II. 11. 4: Th. 8. 2.

Biaorn Buckr, Mant. 5. 4.

Biaorn Buna Veðrar-Grímsson, I. 4. 1: II. 14. 1: IV. 15. 1: V. 10. 4:
Gen. A. 13-14; 25; 32; 35; B. 3; 7: Th. I. 1. 1: Mant. 5. 5: Thorv. 7.

Biaorn Byrðo-smiaor Hroallzson, III. 11. 1: Gen. A. 32.

Biaorn Cearleifsson, Hv. 3. 12.

Biaorn of Dalsminne, see Rauða-Biaorn.

Biaorn Eiríksson, king of Sweden, I. 1. 1.

Biaorn enn Enske, II. 22. 6.

Biaorn, a thrall of Geirmundr Heljar-skinn, II. 17. 6.

Biaorn Gilsson, bishop of Hólar, Hv. 4. 9; 5. 1, &c.: Þorl. 4. 1:
Io. 3. 3; 12. 5: p. 594.

Biaorn Gnúpa-Bárðarson, IV. 15. 5.

Biaorn Goll-beri, I. 6. 4; 6. 6; 9. 1: II. 5. 7: V. 17. 2.

Biaorn enn Hage Þórvallzson, Hv. 5. 5.

Biaorn Harallzson ens Hárfagra, Lib. 8. 4.

Biaorn at Hauge (Eiríksson Eymundarsonar?), III. 12. 1; 12. 7.

Biaorn enn Háve, IV. 11. 6.

Biaorn Helgason, II. 5. 11.

Biaorn Hiallcarsson, II. 22. 4.

Biaorn Hitdoela-kappe Arngeirsson, II. 4. 3; 4. 11; 30. 1.

Biaorn Haofða-Þórðarson, III. 11. 2.

Biaorn Hrólfsson, III. 13. 1-3; 15. 1: V. 12. 5.

Biaorn Hunda-Steinarsson, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5: Mant. 5. 1.

Biaorn Hvalmage Ceallacsson, II. 16. 1-2.

Biaorn enn Hvíte Caðalsson, Gen. A. 11.

Biaorn Iárnsíða Ragnarsson Loðbrókar, III. 11. 1: Gen. A. 32:
Mant. 5. 1.

Biaorn, Iórsala-, Ch. 636.



Biaom Liótólfsson, II. 16. 2.

Biaorn Mársson, II. 21. 1.

Biaorn Ófeigsson Þunnskeggs, III. 8. 3.

Biaorn Óttarsson, II. 9. 3: Th. 7. 3.

Biaorn prestr, chaplain to Bishop Paul, Pol. 10. 1;  11. 2 ; 12. 2.

Biaorn Reyðarsíða, IV. 8. 2.

Biaorn at Reyne (Reyne-Biaorn), IV. 18. 8.

Biaorn Steinolfsson, III. 12. 6.

Biaorn enn Sterke Ceallacsson, II. 9. 1; 16. 1: Th. 1. 1.

Biaorn Sviðin-horne, IV. 11. 7.

Biaorn í Svínhaga, V. 7. 5-6;  8. 4.

Biaorn Sæmundarson, Ch. 637.

Biaorn Þórðarson, p. 641, 50.

Biaorn Þórfinnsson Carls-emnes ok Goðríðar, II. 15.4: p. 641. 27.

Biaorn Þórvallzson, III. 14. 12.

Biaornolfr Grímsson Lodinkinna, III. 16. 1: Gen. A. 31; 34.

Biaornolfr Hrómundarson, I. 3. 1.

Birna Illogadótter, II. 21. 1.

Birningr Gnúpsson, I. 6. 6.

Bitro-Odde Þórvallzson Orgoða, II. 29. 3: Gen. B. 11 (Þórbiarnarson).

Blígr, see Þórðr Blígr.

Blót-Már at Móberge, III. 12. 2.

Blund-Cetill = Cetill Blundr.

Blund-Cetill Geirsson I. 9. 6.

Blæingr Sótason, II. 4. 3; 30. 1: III. 20. 5.

Baoðmóðr í Baoðmóðs-tungo, IV. 16. 2.

Baoðmóðr or Bulka-rúme, II. 4. 14.

Baoðmóðr Gerpir Grímolfsson, II. 28. 5: III. 14. 10; 20. 1 (Grímsson?).

Baoðmódr or Skut, II. 20. 2.

Baoðmóðr Þóresson Haustmyrkrs, V. 16. 7.

Baoðolfr or Hvine Gríms (al. Orms) son, III. 15. 3; 20. 1-3.

Baoðvarr Arnórsson, III. 21. 1.

Baoðvarr Biarke, III. 2. 2.

Baoðvarr Blaoðro-skalle, I. 6. 2: II. 21. 5.

Baoðvarr or Baoðvars-hólom, III. 1. 2.

Baoðvarr at B[a]oðvars-toftom, V. 12. 2.

Baoðvarr Gizorarson, Hv. 2. 13; 2. 19.

Baoðvarr Hrólfsson, III. 15. 10; 21. 1.

Baoðvarr enn Hvíte Þórleifsson, IV. 11. 8; 12. 1-2: V. 17. 2:
Gen. A. 19: Lib. 7. 1.

Baoðvarr, a thrall of Ingimundr enn Gamle, III. 5. 2.

Baoðvarr Snæþrima Þórleifsson, IV. 12. 1: Gen. B. 16.

Baoðvarr Soelgason, see Svína-Baoðvarr.

Baoðvarr Vígsterksson, II. 20. 3; 27. 1.

Baoðvarr Víkinga-Kárason, of Vors, V. 14. 5: Gen. A. 13-14: B. 6-7:
Mant. 5. 1: Cr. 7. 1.

Baoðvarr Þórðarson Baoðvarssonar, Od. 4. 1: p. 640. 50 (B. í Bæ).

Baoðvarr Þórðarson Skúlasonar, IV. 14. 4 n: Od. 3. 2 (B. í Görðum):
Ch. 635: p. 640. 49.

Boge, b. of Hialmgerðr, III. 14. 10.

Bolle Bollason, II. 9. 3; 15. 8; 21. 2: Gen. B. 13-14.

Bolle Skeggjason í Skógom, I. 7. 8: V. 2. 2.

Bolle Þórleiksson, II. 15. 8-9;  20. 6: III. 11. 2: Gen. A. 35: B. 13:
Cr. 6. 3-4.

Baolverkr Blindinga-trióna, II. 11. 4: V. 9. 8: Th. 8. 2.

Baolverkr Eyjolfsson ens Grá, II. 15. 14; 21. 1: Gen. A. 37.

Baorkr Blátannar-skegg Þórkelsson, V. 6. 3; 7. 8: Gen. A. 4.

Baorkr Digre Þórsteinsson, II. 7. 5; 10. 5; 15. 14; 17. 4; 22. 8:
Th. 11. 2.

Baorkr Grímsson, p. 640. 7, 17, 24.

Baorkr Starkaðarson, Gen. A. 4.

Baorkr Þórmóðarson, I. 7. 1: II. 17. 6; 20. 6: Gen. B. 8.

Bót, a bond-woman of Ketilbiaorn's, V. 14. 4.

Bótolfr, bishop of Hólar, Cr. 2. 3.

Bótolfr, ship-captain, Gm. 614, 615.

Bótolfr Sveinbiarnarson (or Þórsteinsson Sveinbiarnarsonar),
III. 11. 2: IV. 17. 4.

Brage, the Poet, II. 2. 1; 17. 2: Mant. 274, 276-7.

Brandax (Brandr ?), f. of Steinn, IV. 9. 5.

Brande frá Gnúpom Eyvindarson Karpa, IV. 7. 3 (Brandr): 18. 1-2.

Brand-Onundr, IV. 12. 1; 12. 3.

Brandr Áskelsson, V. 9. 5.

Brandr Dalcsson, Pol. 11. 2: Gm. 612.

Brandr Eyjolfsson, V. 2. 2.

Brandr enn Fróðe Halldórsson, prior, II. 13. 1.

Brandr Gíslason, II. 23. 2: Cr. 10. 8: Hv. 4. 10.

Brandr Gliro-Hallason, III. 22. 1.

Brandr frá Gnúpom, see Brande.

Brandr enn Orve Vermundarson, II. 7. 8: Gen. B. 13: p. 595.

Brandr Skegg-Ávaldason, III. 5. 16.

Brandr Sæmundarson, bishop of Hólar, I. 7. 8: II. 15. 4: III. 20. 2:
IV. 18. 7:  V. 7. 6; 10. 4:  Hv. 5. 9: Þorl. 12. 4: Pol. 2. 1: 4. 1;
6. 2-3; 7. 3; 11. 2; 15. 2: Io. 14. 5: Gm. 606.

Brandr enn Víðfaorle, Cr. 9. 1.

Brandr, f. of Þórarenn, Gen. B. 14.

Brandr Þórarensson, Gen. B. 14: Ch. 632, 633.

Brandr Þórbiarnarson, V. 2. 2: Gen. B. 14.

Brandr Þóresson Halldórssonar, II. 13. 1.

Brandr Þóresson á Þingvelle, V. 16. 2.

Brandr Þórgrímsson, I. 7. 5: II. 10. 4.

Brandr Þórhaddzson, II. 23. 2.

Brandr Þórkelsson, Lib. 306. 18.

Brandr Þórmóðarson, V. 16. 2.

Brandr Þóroddzson, IV. 3. 7.

Brattr í Brattz-holte, V. 11. 2.

Braut-Onundr, Lib. 306. 10.

Breiðdoeler, IV. 11. 4.

Breiðfirðingar, Lib. 2. 1.

Breiðr Sigmundarson, II. 6. 4; 11. 7.

Brenno-Cáre, see Cáre Saolmundarson.

Brenno-Flose, Cr. 6: 7. 1; 8. 2.

Brese Þórmóðarson, see Berse.

Brodd-Helge Þórgilsson, III. 8. 1: IV. 3. 1; 3. 3: Gen. A. 26; 28-29:
Mant. 5. 6: Cr. 8. 7.

Brodde Þóresson, Mant. 4. 2.

Brodde Þóroddzson, Gen. B. 8 (= Odde Yrarson?)

Broddr, b. of Hialmgerðr, III. 14. 10.

Braondolfr Naddodzson (al. Brynjolfr), V. 13. 4: Gen. A. 15 (Runolfr).

Braondolfr Þórleifsson, V. 13. 4.

Brunda-Bialbe, I. 8. 1.

Brúne, IV. 18. 7.

Brúne Geirmundarson, II. 3. 9.

Brúne enn Hvíte Háreksson, III. 12. 4.

Bryngerðr, m. of Friðleifr í Holte, III. 11. 3.

Bryngerðr Þióðarsdótter, III. 11. 4.

Brynhildr Buðladótter, Mant. 5. 1.

Brynjolfr Auðunnarson, V. 9. 3.

Brynjolfr enn Gamle Þórgeirsson, IV. 3. 5-8; 4. 3; 5. 1-3; 10. 2;
10. 7; 11. 4; 11. 6: V. 17. 2.

Brynjolfr (al. Þórgils) í Hvamme í Mýdale, IV. 18. 1.

Brynjolfr Naddodzson, see Braondolfr.

Buðle, mythical king, f. of Brynhildr, Mant. 5. 1.

Burizlaf [Bogi-slaw], king of Novgorod, III. 9. 1.

Bæjar-menu, Od. 4. 3.




C


Caðall Bialfason, Gen. A. 11.

Caðall, f. of Þórdís, III. 15. 6.

Caðall, f. of Þórgeirr Caðalsson, II. 15. 11.

Caðlín Gaongo-Hrólfsdótter, II. 9. 3: Gen. B. 3.

Cale Cvistzson, I. 7. 7; 10. 4.

Calixtus, Pope, Io. 14. 3.

Calman, I. 7. 2: II. 1. 1-2.

Campa-Grímr, II. 15. 13: III. 17. 3.

Cáre Cylansson, II. 1. 2.

Cáre Saolmundarson (Brenno- or Svíðo-Cáre), V. 13. 5: Gen. A. 19.

Cáre, see also Káre.

Carle, a thrall of Ingolfr Arnarson, I. 3. 7-8.

Carle Ævarsson, III. 6. 1-2.

Carlsefne, Lib. 305. 18: Hv. 3. 1 (see also Þórfinnr).

Cárr Coðransson, III. 11. 5.

Cárr Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

Cárr Þórmóðarson, V. 16. 2.

Caun konungr Solgason, IV. 12. 1: Gen. B. 16 (Baoðvarsson).

Ceallacr Biarnarson á Ceallacsstaoðom (Barna-Ceallacr), II. 16. 1-2;
17. 6: Th. 9. 2.

Ceallacr Biarnarson Hvalmage, II. 16. 1.

*Ceallacr Cearvalsson, V. 7. 1.

Ceallacr enn Gamle Biarnarson, II. 5. 7; 8. 1; 9. 3-4: V. 17. 4:
Gen. B. 10: Th. 7. 3; 9. 3.

Ceallacr, f. of Hrólfr at Ballará, II. 17. 6 (but cf. I. 11. 2).

Ceallacr Hrólfsson, I. 11. 2.

Ceallacr iarl á Iamtalande, II. 9. 1: Th. 1. 1; 2. 1.

Cealleklingar, Th. 7. 3; 9. 2-10. 1.

Cearan, a thrall of Geirmundr Heliar-skinn, II. 17. 6.

Cearfal, King of the Irish, see Cearval.

Cearleifr, see Biaorn Cearleifsson.

Ceartan Ásgeirsson, II. 15. 9b: III. 6. 4: Gen. B. 2.

Ceartan, s. of Goðríðr Másdótter, II. 8. 5.

Ceartan Óleifsson, II. 9. 3; 15. 9; 17. 4; 29. 1: Gen. A. 35: B. 4-5:
Cr. 6. 3-6; 7. 1.

Ceartan Þórhallzson, II. 15. 9b: Gen. B. 2.

Ceartan Þóroddzson at Fróð-aó, II. 22. 8.

*Cearval [Cearbhall], King of the Irish, I. 1. 1: III. 11. 1; 13. 2:
V. 7. 1; 9. 10; 16. 6: Gen. A. 32; B. 15: Th. 1. 4.

Cecilia, d. of Liný, II. 22. 6.

Celestinus, Pope, Pol. 3. 5; 14. 5; 15. 2.

Ceolvor, see Ciolvaor.

Ceotve enn Auðge, see Kiotve.

Cero-Berse Halldórsson, Gen. B. 13.

Cetill Blundr (Blund-Cetill; Aurnólfs-son?), I. 9. 5; 10. 3: II. 2. 5;
3. 2; 15. 14.

*Cetill Bresason, I. 7. 1; 7. 9-10: II. 2. 1.

Cetill á Cetils-staoðom, II. 15. 2.

Cetill Gufa Orlygsson, I. 7. 12; 8. 4; 9. 3: II. 4. 12; 17. 6; 20. 2-6;
27. 1.

Ciolvaor, mother's sister of Tungo-Oddr, I. 10. 4: II. 26. 2.

Claufe, see Klaufe.

Cleppiarn Einarsson, II. 15. 2.

Cleppiarn enn Gamle Þórolfsson, I. 6. 5.

Cleppr Iaorundarson, I. 7. 3.

Cloco-ætt, IV. 10. 2.

Cnaorr  Haofða-Þórðarson, III. 11. 2; 12. 7.

Coðran Eilífsson Arnar, III. 6. 6: Cr. 1. 1; 1. 4: Thorv. 1 ff.

Coðran Hermundarson, Gen. B. 14.

Coðran Ormsson, s. of Herdís Bolladótter, II. 21. 2: Gen. B. 14.

Coðran Svarthaofðason, Ch. 636.

Coðran, s. of Þióðgerðr Coðransdótter, III. 11. 5.

Coðran, s. of Þióðgerðr Flókadótter, III. 11. 5.

Colbeinn Clakhaofðe Atlason, II. 5. 5.

Colbeinn, f. of Flose, IV. 3. 1.

Colbeinn Flosason Valla-Brandzsonar, V. 9. 1: p. 640. 5.

Colbeinn Flosason Þórðarsonar, Laogsaogomaðr, Gen. B. 15: Lib. 9. 4;
9. 7.

Colbeinn, sister's son of Hróarr Tungo-Goðe, IV. 7. 3.

Colbeinn Oddbiarnarson, V. 4. 3.

Colbeinn Sigmundarson í Colbeinsdal, III. 9. 2; 9. 4; 10. 1.

Colbeinn Sigvatzson, IV. 16. 1.

Colbeinn Tumason, Pol. 12. 1: Gm. 606.

Colbeinn Unge (Arnórsson), Gen. A. 1.

Colbeinn Þórðarson Eysteinssonar, II. 15. 7; 15. 11.

Colbeinn Þórðarson Freysgoða, IV. 18. 6: Gen. A. 25: Cr. 6. 3; 6 B*;
7. 1; 8. 2.

Colbeinn á Víðimýre, Gm. 607-9.

Colfinna, see Kolfinna.

Colgríma Beinesdótter, V. 13. 4.

Colgrímr enn Gamle Hrólfsson, I. 7. 7; 9. 1: V. 11. 5; 17. 2.

Colgrímr Hialtason, IV. 11. 2.

Colgrímr Þórgeirsson, see Collgrímr.

Colgrímr Þórhallason, I. 7. 7.

Colle í Collafirðe, II. 29. 4.

Colle í Collavík, III. 22. 5.

Colle Hroallzson (Hof-Colle), II. 4. 15; 20. 7.

Colle Klæingsson, II. 7. 2.

Colle Þórðarson Blígs, III. 11. 7.

Colle Þórmóðarson, Gen. B. 13.

Collgrímr [al. Colgrímr] Þórgeirsson Goða, III. 18. 1.

Collr Ceallaksson, I. 11. 2.

Collr í Collzvík, sworn brother of OErlygr Hrappsson, I. 6. 2:
II. 21. 4.

Collr enn Gráe Þórsteinsson, IV. 11. 8.

Collr Illogason ens Ramma, II. 11. 7.

Collr  Miðfiarðar-Skeggjason, I. 10. 7: III. 2. 3.

Collr Þórbiarnarson Loka, or Collr Þórgilsson frá Þórgilsstaoðom,
II. 19. 5; 20. 2.

Collr Veðrar-Grímsson, see Dala-Collr.

Collsveinn Biarnarson, Gm. 612.

Collsveinn enn Ramme, III. 8. 10.

Colr, a bishop, Mant. 6. 1-2: Hv. 1. 6; 1. 10.

Colr at Colgraofom, II. 8. 2.

Colr Egilsson, Gen. A. 12.

Colr Ketilbiarnarson, V. 14. 5.

Colr í Loekjarbug, Cr. 5. 2.

Colr, a Norseman, Pol. 5. 2.

Colr (al. Kolle) Óttarsson Ballar, V. 7. 7: Gen. 12.

Colr Síðo-Hallzson, IV. 14. 3: Gen. B. 15.

Colr Víkverja-byscop Þórkelsson, V. 14. 5: Lib. 8. 1; 9. 1: Cr. 10. 2:
Hv. 1. 7 b: Io. 3. 3.

Colr Þórsteinsson, Gen. A. 19; 21.

Colskeggr, see Kolskeggr.

Coltorfa, sister of Hialte, Cr. 8. 2.

Columcilla [Columba o' the Cells], I. 6. 1, 4; 7. 6.

*Conall, f. of Ásólfr Alscic, I. 7. 3.

Conall Ketilsson, III. 18. 3; 19. 3-4.

Conall Sockason, III. 19. 3-4.

Conall Steinmóðarson, II. 15. 14: V. 13. 1.

*Core, an Irish thrall of Cetill Gufa, II. 20. 3; 20. 5.

Cormacr Ogmundarson, II. 4. 8.

*Cormlod [Gormflaith], d. of Cearval, [Cearbhall] King of the Irish,
V. 16. 6.

Crafla, f. of Þórsteinn (= Þórkell Crafla?), II. 21. 1.

Crumr á Hafra-nese, IV. 10. 5-6.

Crymlingar, IV. 10. 6.

Crossvíkingar, IV. 10. 5.

Cugallde Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

Cugge, see Þórkell Cugge.

Cvistr ... steinsson, I. 7. 7.

*Cylan, b. of Calman, II. 1. 2.

Cylan Cárason, II. 1. 2.



D


Dagr, early king, Lib. 306. 7.

Dagr, King of Denmark, Cr. 8. 8.

Dagr Þórkelsson ens Háva, III. 21. 2.

Dagrún Þórkelsdótter Bundinfóta, V. 6. 3.

Dagstyggr Risa-konungr, III. 9. 1.

Dagæ [Daðe] Skáld Bárðarson, III. 11. 2.

Dala-Collr, I. 20. 7 (= Hof-Colle?)

Dala-Collr Veðrar-Grímsson, II. 14. 3; 14. 9: III. 18. 1: Gen. A. 35.

Dalcr Hafliðason, Gen. B. 10.

Dalcr Refsson, II. 5. 6.

Dalla Ketilsdótter, III. 20. 3.

Dalla Onundardótter, II. 4. 8.

Dalla Þórvallzdótter, m. of Bishop Gizor, III. 4. 1: V. 13. 3:
Gen. B. 4: Cr. 10. 1: Hv. 1. 2; 2. 6; 2. 8: p. 595-6.

Darre Ormsson, V. 16. 4.

Digr-Ketill, Gen. B. 15: Cr. 8. 7.

Digr-Ormr Þórgilsson Giallanda, III. 5. 15; 6. 3.

Diúpdoeler, Lib. 2. 2.

Dómaldr, early king, Lib. 306. 6.

Dómarr, early king, Lib. 306. 6.

*Drafdrit, a thrall of Hiaorleifr, I. 3. 4.

Drafle, f. of Oddr, II. 11. 7.

Droplaug (Þórgrímsdótter), Gen. A. 19: Gen. B. 15.

Drumb-Oddr, V. 14. 6.

*Dufan í Dufans-dal, II. 22. 3.

Dufgus, f. of Svarthaofðe, p. 639. 12.

Dufnall Erpsson, II. 15. 7.

*Dufnial, s. of Cearval, King of the Irish, IV. 17. 5 (Dofnial):
V. 9. 10.

*Dufþacr Dufnialsson, V. 9. 10.

*Dufþacr í Dufþacs-holte, V. 4. 2; 7. 4.

*Dufþacr, a thrall of Hiaorleifr Hroðmarsson, I. 3. 4; 3. 7.

Dyggve, early king, Lib. 306. 6.

Dýre í Dýra-firðe, II. 23. 1.

Dýrfinna, d. of Þórunn, III. 14. 12.




E


Eadmund, King of England, Lib. 1. 1; 3. 4; 7. 9; 10. 12. (See also
Iátmundr.)

*Eðna Cetilsdótter, I. 9. 3.

Egill Ásbiarnarson, V. 16. 12.

Egill Auðunnarson, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 4.

Egill Colsson, V. 7. 7: Gen. 12.

Egill Gnúpa-Bárðarson, IV. 15. 5.

Egill Hrifloson, p. 641. 15.

Egill enn Rauðe, IV. 10. 3.

Egill Síðo-Hallzson, IV. 14. 4: Gen. A. 19; B. 10; 15: Lib. 305. 13:
Cr. 10. 7: Io. 1. 1; 2. 2.

Egill Skalla-Grímsson, II. 4. 1; 15. 9; 15. 4; 20. 5: V. 17. 4.

Egill Steinbiarnarson Corts, IV. 2. 2.

Egill Vaolo-Steinsson, II. 24. 2; 24. 5.

Egill Vendil-craca, Lib. 306. 8.

Egill Þórðarson Freysgoða, Gen. A. 10; 25.

Eiðr Miðfiarðar-Skeggjason, I. 10. 7: III. 2. 3: V. 3. 4.

Eiðr Þórhallzson, p. 641, 38.

Eilífr enn Auðge Onundarson, V. 7. 2; 14. 7.

Eilífr Helgason Biolo, Cr. 3. 5: Thorv. 7.

Eilífr Ketilsson Einhenda, II. 15. 14: V. 9. 6; 13. 1: Gen. B. 7.

Eilífr í Odda, V. 7. 5.

Eilífr Orn Atlason, III. 6. 6: Thorv. 1: Gen. A. 32 (Bárðarson):
Cr. 1. 1.

Eilífr enn Prúðe Ceallacsson, II. 16. 1-2

Eilífr enn Unge Eilífsson, V. 7. 5; 8. 7; 9. 4.

Eilífr Valla-Brannzson, V. 3. 7.

Einarr ábóte Mársson, Pol. 15. 2.

Einarr Arason, Gen. B. 10.

Einarr Auðunnarson Rotins, III. 15. 8; 19. 3-4: Gen. A. 32:
Lib. 305. 21.

Einarr Bruðr Biarnason, p. 640. 40.

Einarr Cetilsson frá Cetils-staoðom, II. 15. 1.

Einarr Cleppsson, I. 7. 3.

Einarr Conalsson, III. 19. 3-4.

Einarr í Einarsfirðe, II. 12. 9.

Einarr Eyjolfsson, p. 642. 5.

Einarr Flosason, p. 640. 8.

Einarr forkr, Gm. 606.

Einarr Gilsson, p. 599.

Einarr Grímsson, p. 640. 18.

Einarr, f. of Halldóra, IV. 3. 1.

Einarr Halldórsson, III. 14. 19.

Einarr Helgoson, Lib. 305. 21.

Einarr Hialtlendingr, V. 15. 2.

Einarr Joansson Loptzsonar, Od. 2. 2.

Einarr Ketilsson Þórvallzsonar, III. 14. 10.

Einarr Magnússon, IV. 14. 4: V. 9. 6: Gen. B. 10: Hv. 4. 1.

Einarr Nesja-Cniúcsson, II. 20. 8.

Einarr Olvesson Barna-karls, V. 13. 1; 16. 3: Gen. A. 16: Mant. 5. 5.

Einarr Osvífsson, II. 9. 3.

Einarr Sigmundarson, see Laugarbrecko-Einarr.

Einarr Skálaglam Helgason, II. 9. 3.

Einarr Sniallsson, Mant. 5. 5.

Einarr Teitsson of Stafaholt, II. 3. 7; 7. 1; 26. 4.

Einarr Þóresson Graut-Atlasonar, IV. 3. 3.

Einarr Þórgeirsson, III. 22. 1.

Einarr Þórsteinsson, III. 19. 4.

Einarr Þórvallzson, Ch. 637.

Eindriðe Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

Eindriðe Illogason ens Ramma, II. 11. 7.

Eiríkr, bishop of Stavanger, archbishop of Trondhjem, Þorl 8. 2:
Pol. 3. 2; 3. 5; 7. 3: Gm. 613, 615.

Eiríkr Eymundarson, King of Sweden, I. 1. 1: II. 9. 1.

Eiríkr Gnúpsson, bishop  of Greenland, I. 6. 6.

Eiríkr or Goðdaolom Hroallzson, III. 6. 3; 7. 7-8; 8. 1; 8. 3; 8. 5:
IV. 3. 1: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 28 (Geirmundarson Hroallzsonar); 33 (id.).

Eiríkr iarl Hákonarson, Lib. 7. 9: p. 329, 8: Cr. 8. 12.

Eiríkr Haognason ens Hvíta, II. 21. 1.

Eiríkr Haorðakonungr, II. 17. 3.

Eiríkr Hunda-Steinarsson, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5: Mant. 5. 1.

Eiríkr í Keldo-dal, II. 22. 6.

Eiríkr Magnússon, King of Norway, Ch. 638.

Eiríkr Olfuss, III. 15. 2; 15. 4-5.

Eiríkr Orðig-skegge, III. 8. 1: Gen. A. 28. 33.

Eiríkr Ragnarsson Loðbrókar, Mant. 5. 1.

Eiríkr Rauðe Þórvallzson, II. 12. 1-10; 15.4; 19. 4; 28. 3: Lib. 6. 1.

Eiríkr Sigurðarson Bióðaskalla, á Ofrostaoðom, Gen. B. 5-6.

Eiríkr iarl Sigurðarson, b. of King Sverrer, Þorl. 15. 1.

Eiríkr Snara, II. 28. 5.

Eiríkr á Snorra-staoðom, Pol. 7. 1.

Eiríkr at Uppsala, King of the Swedes, Lib. 7. 9.

Eiríkr Víkinga-Kárason, Gen. B. 7: Mant. 5. 1: Cr. 7. 1.

Eirny Þiðrandadótter, II. 18. 1.

Elldgrímr, s. of Arnbiorg, II. 3. 5.

Elldiarn Arnórsson, p. 641. 50.

Elfraðr enn Ríki [Ælfred the mighty], King of England, I. 1. 1.

Elín, d. of King Burizlaf, III. 9. 1.

Elliða-Grímr Ásgrímsson, III. 15. 5: V. 7. 8: Gen. A. 13.

Erlendr Hímalde Jónsson, II. 9. 3.

Erlendr enn Sterke Óláfsson, f. of Haukr, V. 17. 1: Mant. 5. 1:
p. 639. 9; 640. 5, etc.

Erlendr prestr, Gm. 612.

Erlingr (al. Egill) Eyvindarson, V. 16. 10.

Erlingr iarl, Þorl. 8. 1; 15. 1.

Erlingr Knýtir, III. 13. 2.

Erlingr Skiálgsson, Gen. B. 15-16.

Erlygr: see OErlygr.

Erplingar, II. 15. 7.

Erpr Lútande, II. 2. 1.

*Erpr Meldunsson iarls, II. 14. 4; 15. 7; 15. 11.

Esbergingar, I. 6. 4.

Esphoelingar, p. 277.

Eugenius, Pope, Hv. 5. 11.

Eydís Einarsdótter, III. 19. 4.

Eyfirðingar, Lib. 2. 1: Cr. 4. 3.

Eyfroeðr enn Gamle, V. 14. 6.

Eyja (al. Evia) Ingiallzdótter, II. 20. 8.

Eyjarr Þórolfsson Fasthalda, III. 1. 2.

Eyjolfr Baolverksson, Gen. A. 37.

Eyjolfr Egilsson, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 4.

Eyjolfr Einarsson Auðunnarsonar, see Eyjolfr Valgerðarson.

Eyjolfr Einarsson Þórgeirssonar, III. 22. 1.

Eyjolfr Eyjarsson, III. 2. 3.

Eyjolfr Goðmundarson Gása, p. 641. 45.

Eyjolfr enn Gráe Þórðarson Gellis, II. 15. 8; 15. 14; 21. 1; 24. 2:
Gen. A. 37: Lib. 306. 16: Cr. 1. 2.

Eyjolfr Hallbiarnarson, II. 18. 1.

Eyjolfr prestr Hallzson, Gm. 607.

Eyjolfr enn Halte Goðmundarson ens Ríka, III. 4. 1; 7. 1; 21. 2:
Gen. B. 4; 15: Lib. 306. 1.

Eyjolfr Illogason ens Ramma, II. 11. 7.

Eyjolfr Ingiallzson Helgasonar ens Magra, III. 14. 4.

Eyjolfr Narfason, III. 14. 11.

Eyjolfr Nesja-Cniúcsson, II. 20. 8.

Eyjolfr Saurr, II. 12. 1.

Eyjolfr Skeggjason, V. 2. 2.

Eyjolfr Snorrason, Gm. 612-14.

Eyjolfr Snorrason Goða, Gen. B. 13.

Eyjolfr in Stafaholt, Od. 3. 1; 4. 1.

Eyjolfr Surtzson, II. 5. 10.

Eyjolfr Sæmundarson, Hv. 4. 10: Þorl. 3. 1.

Eyjolfr Valgerðarson [s. of Einarr Auðunnarson], III. 15. 8; 15. 12;
19. 3-4: V. 17. 4: Gen. A. 32: Mant. 3. 1: Lib. 305. 21: Cr. 1. 2;
1. 3; 2. 4.

Eyjolfr Þórðarson Hreðo, Gen. B. 16.

Eyjolfr Þórkelsson Kappa, II. 23. 2.

Eyjolfr Þórsteinsson, Ch. 633.

Eyjolfr Æsoson, II. 12. 2; 16. 1.

Eylaugr, hersir or Sogne, I. 4. 1.

Eymundr Aska-spiller Þóresson, Gen. B. 6.

Eymundr, f. of Eiríkr, King of the Swedes, I. 1. 1.

Eyrbyggjar, II. 11. 6.

Eysteinn Aðilsson, Lib. 306. 11.

Eysteinn Auðunnarson, III. 4. 1.

Eysteinn, King of the Danes, V. 2. 1.

Eysteinn enn Digre, IV. 16. 3-4.

Eysteinn Eiðsson, I. 10. 7.

Eysteinn Eilífsson Arnar, III. 6. 6.

Eysteinn Erlendzson, archbishop of Trondhjem, II. 9. 3: Hv. 5. 9;
5. 10: Þorl. 7. 2; 8. 1; 15. 1: p. 569: Od. 1. 1; 2. 5.

Eysteinn fret, Lib. pr. 2.

Eysteinn Glumra Ívarsson, II. 14. 1: III. 15. 12: IV. 14. 1:
Gen. A. 19.

Eysteinn Hranason, IV. 16. 4.

Eysteinn Harallzson, King of Norway, Hv. 5. 12; 5. 13.

Eysteinn Magnússon, King of Norway, Lib. 10. 12: Hv. 3. 11; 3. 13:
Io. 7. 7; 14. 3.

Eysteinn Meinfretr Álfsson, II. 15. 11: III. 1. 1.

Eysteinn Radulfsson (al. Randulfsson), III. 14. 20.

Eysteinn Þórbergsson, I. 10. 7: V. 3. 4.

Eysteinn Þórgeirsson, II. 5. 14.

Eyvara Þórhallzdótter, sister of Bp. Thorlak, Þorl. 4. 4.

Eysteinn Þórsteinsson Drangakarls, IV. 18. 5-6.

Eysteinn Þórsteinsson Titlings, IV. 18. 1-2.

Eyvindr iarl Arnmóðsson, V. 16. 4.

Eyvindr Auðkúla, III. 5. 14.

Eyvindr Austmaðr Biarnarson, II. 14. 1; 23. 2; 26. 2: III. 13. 2:
15. 1: V. 12. 5: Gen. A. 32: Th. 1. 4: Lib. 2. 1.

Eyvindr Baugsson, V. 7. 1-2.

Eyvindr, s. of Birna, II. 21. 1.

Eyvindr, counsellor of Earl Hákon, II. 24. 6.

Eyvindr Cné, II. 22. 5; 24. 8.

Eyvindr Eiki-krókr Helgason, II. 5. 11: IV. 14. 10.

Eyvindr Elldr, II. 15. 10.

Eyvindr enn Eyverske, IV. 19. 1; 19. 4.

Eyvindr Hane, III. 14. 21.

Eyvindr Herroeðarson, II. 28. 4.

Eyvindr Hialte Helgason, I. 5. 1.

Eyvindr Hrólfsson, III. 15. 10.

Eyvindr Karpe, IV. 15. 6; 18. 1; 18. 3: Gen. A. 4; 10; 25 (Karfe).

Eyvindr Kollsveinsson, I. 5. 1.

Eyvindr í Kvígo-vaógom, V. 16. 3; 16. 10.

Eyvindr Lambe (Berðlo-Kárason), V. 5. 1-2.

Eyvindr Loðinsson Onguls, III. 16. 5.

Eyvindr í Mióva-firðe, IV. 10. 2.

Eyvindr Skalda-spiller Finnzson, V. 5. 1.

Eyvindr Smiðr Þórðarson Illoga, IV. 14. 10.

Eyvindr Soerkver, III. 5. 2; 5. 8; 5. 16; 6. 3.

Eyvindr Vápne Herjolfsson, IV. 11. 3.

Eyvindr Vápne Þórsteinsson, IV. 2. 1-3.

Eyvindr Þórgrímsson, V. 16. 6.

Eyvindr Þórsteinsson Haofða, III. 17. 2; 19. 1-4; V. 17. 2.

Eyþiófr, f. of Helge Eyþiófsson, II. 22. 3.




F


Falke Þórarensson, p. 642. 1.

Fastný Brynjolfsdótter ens Gamla, IV. 3. 6.

Faxe, one of Flóke's followers, I. 2. 3.

Fiarska-Fiðr, see Fiska-Fiðr.

Fiðr, see Finnr.

Finna Hrútzdótter, II. 15. 10.

Finna Skoftadótter, II. 5. 6.

Finna Þórmóðardótter, V. 13. 5.

Finnboge Colbeinsson, II. 5. 5.

Finnboge Helgason, II. 5. 11.

Finnboge enn Ramme Ásbiarnarson, III. 16. 5.

Finnboge Þórgeirsson, II. 5. 14.

Finnboge enn Ramme Geirsson, II. 6. 4.

Finne enn Draumspake Þórgeirsson Goða, III. 18. 1.

Finne í Finna-firðe, IV. 1. 2.

Finne Mottulsson, II. 2. 1.

Finngeirr Þórsteinsson Ondors, II. 11. 1; 11. 3: Th. 7. 1.

Finnr, herra, Ch. 638.

Finnr enn Auðge Halldórsson, I. 7. 8; 7. 12: II. 3. 1: V. 11. 6.

Finnr Hallzson Laogsaogomaðr, IV. 5. 4: V. 16. 10: Hv. 4. 12.

Finnr Otkelsson, V. 3. 4.

Finnr enn Skiálge Eyvindarson, V. 5. 2.

Finnvarðr Hallkelsson, II. 2. 1.

Finnvarðr Þórkelsson, II. 6. 5.

Fiolner, Lib. 306. 5.

Fiorleif (al. Freyleif) Eyvindardótter, III. 17. 2; 18. 2; 19. 1;
19. 5.

Fiska-Fiðr, II. 23. 2 (al. Fiarska-Fiðr; = Finnr Fiske Ketilsson?).

Fleinn Hiaorsson, the Poet, V. 2. 1.

Flióta-menn, Gen. A. 32.

Flóke, a thrall of Cetill Gufa, I. 9. 3: II. 20. 3.

Flóke, f. of Gnúpr, I. 9. 6.

Flóke Vilgerðarson (al. Glámsson), I. 2. 3; 3. 3: III. 11. 5.

Flose Biarnarson, priest, Mant. 5. 1: p. 640. 5, 7, etc.

Flose Eiríksson, II. 28. 5.

Flose Kolbeinsson, IV. 3. 1 = Flose Valla-Brannzson, V. 9. 1.

Flose enn Norræne Þórbiarnarson ens Gaulverska, V. 6. 2; 8. 4; 9. 1-2;
10. 2.

Flose Þórðarson Freysgoða, IV. 18. 6: Gen. A. 21; 25; 28; B. 15:
Nj. 365.

Flugo-Grímr Snorrason, II. 23. 2.

Fostolfr Véfroeðarson, III. 6. 3.

Freygerðr Hallzdótter, V. 16. 10.

Freygerðr Hrafnsdótter ens Heimska, V. 3. 1.

Freys-gyðlingar, V. 17. 2.

Freysteinn enn Fagre, IV. 10. 4.

Freyviðr Álfsson, II. 5. 6.

Friðgerðr Cearvalsdótter Írakonungs, III. 11. 1: Gen. A. 32.

Friðgerðr Hyrningsdótter, Gen. B. 9; 11.

Friðgerðr Illogadótter ens Ramma, II. 11. 7.

Friðgerðr Þórðardótter frá Haofða, II. 15. 14: III. 11. 2: Cr. 2. 2.

Friðgerðr Þóresdótter Himo, III. 11. 2.

Friðleifr í Holte, III. 11. 4.

Friðleifr á Stafshóle, III. 12. 2 (= Oddleifr ?).

Friðmundr í Forsoelo-dal, III. 5. 2; 5. 7.

Friðrekr, Bishop, Mant. 6. 1; 6. 2: Lib. 8. 1: Cr. 1. 1; 2. 4:
Thorv. 4: p. 414: Hv. 1. 11.

Fróðe Hroereksson, Gen. A. 1.

Fróðe, king, f. of Ingialldr, III. 13. 1: Gen. B. 12.

Fróðe Vemundarson ens Gamla, I. 3. 10: V. 10. 1; 10. 4.





G


Galdra-Heðinn, Cr. 4. 3.

*Galman (al. Galmr) á Galmans-straond, III. 14. 12.

Galte Arnmóðsson, III. 7. 4; 20. 3.

Galte Grísarson í Áse, III. 20. 4; 22. 1.

Galte Óttarsson, III. 5. 16.

Galte Þórfinnzson, II. 5. 4.

Gamle Skeggjason Skammhondungs, III. 1. 2.

Gamle Þórðarson, III. 1. 2.

Garðarr Svávarsson, I. 2. 1-2: III. 18. 2; 19. 2: IV. 5. 2; 7. 1:
Gen. 5.

Gaukr Þórkelsson Trandils, V. 13. 3.

Gautr Gautreksson, II. 17. 6.

Gautr í Gautz-dale, III. 6. 1-2.

Gautr, see Hialmon-Gautr.

Gautrekr enn Orve, II. 17. 6.

Geirbiaorg Balkadótter, I. 9. 2: II. 4. 3; 30. 1.

Geire Biarnarson at Lundom, IV. 15. 5.

Geire í Geiradal, II. 17. 4: III. 10. 2; 21. 3.

Geire Þórkelsson, IV. 15. 5.

Geirfinnr enn Rauðe Solvason, Gen. A. 10.

Geirhilldr, a witch, III. 14. 18.

Geirhilldr Eiríksdótter, see Geirríðr.

Geirhilldr, d. of Flóke Vilgerðarson, I. 2. 3.

Geirlaug Árnadótter, Od. 3. 1.

Geirlaug, d. of Oddný, p. 641. 20, 39.

Geirlaug Skúladótter, IV. 1. 1.

Geirlaug Steinmóðsdótter, Cr. 1. 5.

Geirlaug (al. Þórlaug) Þórmóðardótter, I. 7. 2; 10. 1.

Geirleifr Eiríkson, I. 6. 8: II. 21. 1-3: Th. 7. 3.

Geirleifr Hrappson í Haga, III. 14. 14; 19. 5.

Geirleifr Onundarson, Gen. A. 21.

Geirleifr, f. of Þórsteinn Titlingr, Gen. A. 25.

Geirmundr Biarnarson Goll-bera, I. 9. 1.

Geirmundr Eiríksson Orðigskeggja, III. 8. 1 (= Hróalldr Gen. A. 28).

Geirmundr Gunnbiarnarson, II. 3. 9.

Geirmundr Heljar-skinn Hiaorsson, II. 17. 2-4; 17. 6; 20. 4; 22. 1;
25. 1; 27. 1-2: III. 5. 12: V. 17. 2: Gen. B. 8; 11: Mant. 274-7.

Geirmundr Hróallzson, Gen. A. 28; 33; = Hróalldr Geirmundarson,
III. 8. 1.

Geirmundr OErlygsson, I. 6. 4.

Geirmundr Sæmundarson, III. 7. 1; 12. 2.

Geirmundr Þórgrímsson of Máva-hlíð, II. 7. 2.

Geirmundr Þrasason, V. 2. 2.

Geirný Gnúpsdótter, V. 9. 8.

Geirolfr under Geirolfsgnúpe, II. 28. 2.

Geirolfr Ulfsson, III. 18. 3.

Geirr enn Auðge Cetilsson Blunds, I. 9. 5-6.

Geirr, f. of Finnboge enn Ramme (Fróðe), II. 6. 4.

Geirr Goðe Ásgeirsson, V. 7. 8; 14. 7; 17. 4: Gen. A. 14.

Geirr, foster brother of Haorðr Grímkellsson, I. 10. 5.

Geirríðr, w. of Biaorn Baolverksson, II. 11. 4: Th. 8. 1-2.

Geirríðr (al. Geirhildr) Eiríksdótter Olfuss, III. 15. 5.

Geirríðr Geirmundardótter, II. 17. 6.

Geirríðr Þórolfsdótter Bægifótz, II. 7. 6; 11. 5: Th. 8. 3.

Geirroeðr á Eyre, II. 11. 1-5: Th. 7. 1; 8. 1; 9. 3.

*Geirroðr, a thrall of Hiaorleifr Hroðmarsson, I. 3. 4.

Geirsteinn á Iaorva, II. 12. 1.

Geirsteinn Cialke, II. 20. 9.

Geirþiófr Valþiófsson, II. 22. 5.

Geirþiófr Þórolfsson Sparrar, II. 21. 4.

Geiter Lýtingsson í Krossavík, IV. 2. 2; 3. 2: Gen. A. 19: B. 15:
Cr. 1. 2.

Geitlendingar, I. 11. 3.

Gelasius, Pope, Hv. 3. 11.

Geller Baolverksson Laogsaogomaðr, II. 21. 1: Lib. 8. 6; 9. 5:
Hv. 1. 12.

Geller Illogason ens Ramma, II. 7. 11.

Geller Ormsson, III. 15. 8.

Geller Þórkelsson, II. 9. 3; 15. 8; 19. 2: Gen. B. 14: Mant. 1. 7:
Lib. 4. 2; 9. 2: p. 306.

Gerðr Baoðvarsdótter, III. 1. 2.

Gerðr Ceallacsdótter, II. 5. 7;  9. 4: Th. 7. 3.

Gerðr Vaðadótter, V. 12. 3.

Gestr, s. of Álfgerðr Þórormsdótter, V. 13. 5.

Gestr Biarnarson, II. 5. 11.

Gestr enn Spake Oddleifsson, II. 21. 1; 24. 2; 26. 4: V. 15. 1:
Cr. 1. 2; 5. 5; 8. 7.

Gestr Þórgeirsson, II. 4. 14.

Giaflaug Arnbiarnardótter, III. 11. 2.

Giaflaug Ceallacsdótter, II. 9. 1; 9. 3; 16. 1: Th. 1. 1;  2. 1.

Giafvaldr, courtier of King Magnús Berbeinn, II. 7. 2: Io. 4. 5.

Gilla-synir, Kings of Norway, Hv. 5. 13.

*Gille Biaðuchsson, Gen. B. 15.

Gille Iathguðsson, Gen. B. 15.

Gillikristr ( = Haraldr gilli), p. 596.

Gils-beckingar, Gen. B. 13.

Gils Hafrsson, Hv. 4. 1.

Gils Illogason, II. 7. 2: Io. 4. 5.

Gils Skeiðarnef, II. 17. 4-5; 18. 4; 18. 7; 29. 5.

Gils Snorrason, f. of Þórðr, II. 15. 9 b; 20. 2; 23. 2: Gen. B. 2.

Gísle Eyjolfsson, II. 23. 2.

Gísle Finnason, of Gautland, Io. 10. 1; 12. 4; p. 592.

Gísle Gnúpa-Bárðarson, IV. 15. 5.

Gísle Súrsson, II. 17. 4; 22. 8: Gen. A. 36: p. 319. 6.

Gísle Þórbiarnarson, II. 3. 8.

Gísle Þórðarson, II. 15. 7.

Gísle Þórgautzson, II. 2. 3.

Gísle Þórgautzson (another), II. 2. 3.

Gisroeðr, = Gizorr, Lib. 10. 1.

Gitzorr, see Gizorr.

Gizorr Einarsson, Cr. 10. 10.

Gizorr Glaðe Ceallacsson, II. 16. 1.

Gizorr Hafr-Biarnarson í Seltiarnarnese, V. 16. 12.

Gizorr Hallzson Laogsaogomaðr, II. 20. 8; 23. 2: III. 14. 19: IV. 3. 7;
14. 4; V. 15. 2: Gen. B. 15: Hv. pr. 2; 3. 7; 5. 3; 5. 6: Þorl. 7. 4;
12. 2; 12. 7; 13. 1; 14. 2-3: Pol. 2. 3; 4. 3; 7. 2; 7. 5; 15. 2;
Gm. 608.

Gizorr Hvíte Teitzson, I. 11. 1: V. 7. 8; 14. 5: Gen. A. 14; B. 6-7;
15: Mant. 5. 1: Lib. 7. 1; 9. 1: p. 305. 9: Cr. 1. 2; 4. 3; 5. 2;
6. 2; 8. 1; 10. 1: Hv. 1. 1: Io. 1. 2.

Gizorr Ísleifsson, bishop [II. 23. 2?] III. 4. 1: IV. 11. 8: V. 13. 3;
14. 5: Gen. B. 4: Mant. 1. 1-2; 1. 5; 3. 2; 5. 1: Lib. pr. 2; 9. 2;
10. 1, etc.: Cr. 10. 1, etc.: Hv. 1. 2; 2. 1, etc.; 4. 6: Pol. 14. 6:
Io. 3. 3; 4. 5; 6. 1, etc.: pp. 596, 630.

Gizorr Kaðalsson, p. 312. 9.

Gizorr, f. of Teitr í Haofða, V. 12. 4.

Gizorr iarl Þórvallzson, II. 22. 6: III. 14. 19: IV. 14. 4: Gen. B. 15.

Gliomal, King of the Irish, II. 14. 4.

Gliro-Halle Sigurðarson, III. 22. 1: IV. 1. 2.

Gloeðer, h. of Gróa Helgadótter, IV. 16. 2.

Glúmr, = Vígaglúmr, p. 312. 3.

Glúmr Geirason, II. 17. 4: III. 10. 2; 21. 3.

Glúmr Hildesson, Gen. A. 21.

Glúmr Óleifsson Hialta, Gen. A. 18.

Glúmr Þórarensson of Vatnlausa, I. 6. 5; 10. 4.

Glúmr Þórgilsson, Thorv. 5.

Glúmr Þórkelsson, I. 6. 5; 10. 4.

Glúmr, f. of Þórbiaorg Colbrún, II. 20. 8.

Gnúpa-Bárðr Heyjangs-Biarnarson, III. 17. 1-2; 21. 1: IV. 15. 5:
Gen. A. 31; 34.

Gnúpr Birningsson, I. 6. 6.

Gnúpr Flókason, I. 9. 6.

Gnúpr Grímkelsson, I. 6. 6.

Gnúpr Molda-Gnúpsson, IV. 17. 3-4: V. 9. 8.

Gó, sister of Górr and Nórr, IV. 12. 1.

Goðbrandr Goðleifsson, II. 5. 10.

Goðbrandr Kúla, II. 29. 1: III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5: Mant. 5. 1.

Goðbrandr Þórsteinsson Ingimundarsonar, III. 5. 13.

Goðbiaorg Ófeigsdótter Burlu-fótar, II. 29. 1: Gen. B. 5
(Óleifsdótter).

Goðdæler, V. 17. 4.

Goðine, = Earl Godwin, Hv. 1. 12.

Goðine enn Góðe, Io. 1. 4: p. 631.

Goðiscolcr, foreign bishop, Mant. 6. 1: Lib. 8. 2.

Goðlaug Eyjolfsdótter, II. 23. 2.

Goðlaug Gunnarsdótter, Gen. A. 11.

Goðlaug Helgadótter, III. 23. 2.

Goðlaug Hrólfsdótter, III. 15. 10; 16. 1.

Goðlaug Óttarsdótter, p. 640. 43.

Goðlaug, w. of Vestmarr í Reykjardal, III. 18. 3.

Goðlaugr enn Auðge Þórmóðarson, I. 9. 1; II. 5. 7.

Goðlaugr, b. of Gils Skeiðar-nef, II. 29. 5.

Goðlaugr Loftzson, V. 16. 10.

Goðlaugr Þórfinnzson, II. 5. 8; 15. 10; 20. 2: III. 6. 4: Gen. B. 13.

Goðleif Ketilsdótter Smiðjo-drums, II. 11. 7.

Goðleifr Arason, II. 19. 3: V. 4. 6: Gen. A. 38: Cr. 4. 4.

Goðleifr Goðlaugsson, II. 5. 8.

Goðleifr prestr, III. 6. 4.

Goðleifr Surtzson, II. 5. 10.

Goðmundr Ámundason, Pol. 15. 2.

Goðmundr Bialfason, abbot of Ver, Þorl. 10. 3: Pol. 15. 2.

Goðmundr Brandzson, priest, II. 23. 2: Cr. 10. 8: Hv. 4. 10.

Goðmundr Coðransson, Hv. 4. 10.

Goðmundr enn Dýre, Gm. 608.

Goðmundr gáse Þórsteinsson, p. 641. 45.

Goðmundr enn Góðe Arason, bishop of Hólar, III. 15. 8: Pol. 6. 3;
7. 3; 12. 1: p. 592: Gm. 606-15.

Goðmundr Goll-Þóresson, II. 17. 5.

Goðmundr Grímsson, pp. 600, 601.

Goðmundr Gríss Ámundason, II. 22. 6.

Goðmundr Hamalsson, I. 3. 10.

Goðmundr at Helgafell, Cl. 633.

Goðmundr Ketilsson, Hv. 5. 13.

Goðmundr Óláfsson, the priest, Gen. B. 10.

Goðmundr enn Ríke Eyjolfsson, III. 4. 1; 6. 6; 7. 1; 15. 8: Gen. A. 26;
32; B. 15: Lib. 306. 1: Cr. 6. 3: 7. 1.

Goðmundr Snorrason, Gen. B. 10.

Goðmundr Saolmundarson í Ásbiarnar-nese, II. 15. 96: III. 6. 6:
Gen. B. 2.

Goðmundr Þórðarson, Gm. 612-14.

Goðmundr Þórgeirsson Laogsaogomaðr, Lib. 10. 88.

Goðmundr, s. of Steinunn, Gen. B. 10.

Goðmundr Þórsteinsson, p. 639. 5.

Goðný Baoðvarsdótter, w. of Hvamm-Sturla, IV. 14. 4: p. 639. 2:
640. 29, etc.

Goðný Brynjolfsdótter, IV. 3. 8.

Goðný Hafþórsdótter, II. 4. 14.

Goðný Hrafnkelsdóttir, I. 4. 4.

Goðný Þórolfsdótter, II. 7. 8: Th. 8. 3.

Goðríðr Brynjolfsdótter ens Gamla, IV. 3. 7.

Goðríðr Illogadótter ens Ramma, II. 11. 7.

Goðríðr Mársdótter, II. 8. 5.

Goðríðr Narfadótter, Gen. B. 10.

Goðríðr Þórbiarnardótter, II. 15. 4.

Goðríðr Þórkelsdótter ens Svarta, III. 18. 1: Gen. A. 31; 34.

Goðríðr Þórsteinsdótter Síðo-Hallzsonar, IV. 14. 4.

Goðroeðr Biarnarson, Lib. 8. 4.

Goðroeðr Hálfdanarson, king, II. 14. 1: Lib. pr. 2: p. 306. 12.

Goðroeðr Lióme, Mant. 5. 2.

Goðrún, d. of Álof, p. 642. 40.

Goðrún Ámundadótter, IV. 12. 3.

Goðrún Ásolfsdótter, II. 21. 1.

Goðrún Biarnadótter, p. 640. 40.

Goðrún (Brandzdótter), I. 7. 8: V. 7. 6.

Goðrún Colbeinsdótter Flosasonar, V. 9. 1.

Goðrún Colbeinsdótter Sighvatzsonar, IV. 16. 1.

Goðrún Goðmundardótter, II. 15. 9 b: Gen. B. 2.

Goðrún Halldórsdótter Snorrasonar, III. 6. 4.

Goðrún, w. of Heðinn at Heðinshaofða, III. 18. 2.

Goðrún Ingigerðardótter, p. 640. 9.

Goðrún, d. of Iórunn Hialtadótter, V. 9. 6.

Goðrún Ketilsdótter, III. 18. 1.

Goðrún Klyppsdótter, Gen. B. 16.

Goðrún Liótzdótter, Gen. B. 10; 15.

Goðrún Óspaksdótter, Gen. B. 14.

Goðrún Ósvífsdótter, II. 9. 3; 15. 8; 18. 4; 20. 7; 21. 2: III. 21. 8:
Gen. A. 36; B. 3.

Goðrún Sigmundardótter, Gen. B. 14.

Goðrún Snælaugardótter, Od. 3. 2.

Goðrún Snorradótter Goða, Gen. B. 13.

Goðrún Snorradótter Halldórssonar, p. 641. 23: 642. 6.

Goðrún Þórarensdótter Sælings, IV. 3. 1.

Goðrún Þórðardótter, Gen. B. 10.

Goðrún Þóresdótter Skegg-Broddasonar, IV. 3. 1: V. 9. 1.

Goðrún Þórkelsdótter Þrastarsonar, II. 30. 3.

Goðrún Þóroddzdótter, Pol. 10. 1.

Goðrún Þórsteinsdótter Ranglátz, Mant. 5. 1: p. 640. 3. 5, etc.

Goðrún Þórsteinsdótter Svarfaðar, III. 14. 5.

Goðþormr Ragason, I. 9. 4.

Goll-Þórer Oddzson Skrauta, II. 17. 5.

Gaongo-Hrólfr Raognvaldzson Mæra-iarls, first Duke of Normandy,
II. 9. 3: V. 14. 1-2 (Gaongo-Hrólfr Yxna-Þóresson, Gen. B. 3, most
likely the same man).

Gormr enn gamle, King of Denmark, I. 1. 1.

Gormr, a Swedish nobleman, III. 9. 1.

Górr, b. of Nórr, IV. 12. 1.

Gote Alfarensson, II. 7. 3.

Gothormr Finnolfsson, priest, Hv. 1. 8; 2. 3.

Gothormr, King of Norway, Pol. 15. 2.

Gaoto-skeggjar, II. 14. 5.

Grane of Grana-staðir, II. 4. 10.

Grane Gunnarsson, V. 7. 8.

Grane Hrólfsson, III. 15. 10.

Graut-Atle Þóresson Þiðranda, IV. 3. 1; 3. 3; 4. 1-3; 5. 4: V. 17. 2:
Gen. A. 28.

Gregorius VII, Pope, Lib. 10. 11; 10. 12: Hv. 2. 4; 2. 18; 3. 10:
Io. 6. 1.

*Grelaod, d. of Biartmar iarl, II. 22. 2.

Grelaod, w. of Þórfinnr Hausa-kliúfr, II. 14. 2.

Grenjaðr Hermundarson Holkins, II. 30. 3.

Grenjaðr Hrappsson, III. 19. 1; 19. 4-5: Cr. 1. 3.

Grettir Onundarson, II. 29. 1: Gen. B. 5.

Grettir enn Sterke Ásmundarson, II. 29. 1: III. 1. 2; 20. 2:
Gen. B. 4-5.

Gríma Hallkelsdótter, II. 2. 1; 6. 5.

Grímarr Grímsson, II. 4. 9.

Grímkell Goðe Biarnarson, I. 6. 6; 9. 1.

Grímkell Ulfsson Kráko, II. 7. 1-2.

Grímolfr of Grímolfsstaðir, II. 4. 9.

Grímolfr af Ogðom, II. 28. 5 (?): III. 14. 10; 20. 1: V. 16. 6 (?).

Grímolfr Óláfsson Becks, III. 12. 6.

Grímolfr Óláfsson Iafna-collz í Unaðs-dale, II. 25. 2; 26. 5.

Grímr Ásgrímsson, Gen. A. 13.

Grímr Camban, I. 6. 8: III. 15. 8: Gen. A. 32.

Grímr Droplaugarson, Gen. B. 15.

Grímr Eyrarleggr Gunnsteinsson, III. 14. 20.

Grímr Geitskor, Lib. 2. 3.

Grímr Glamaðr, p. 640. 17, 23.

Grímr Gráfeldar-múle, III. 18. 1.

Grímr Grímolfsson, II. 4. 9: III. 20. 1.

Grímr of Grímsdal, a freedman of Skalla-Grímr, II. 3. 12; 4. 2.

Grímr of Grímsgil, I. 10. 6.

Grímr í Gríms-nese, II. 21. 1: IV. 4. 2: V. 15. 1-2: Gen. A. 15.

Grímr, f. of Hallbera, III. 2. 3.

Grímr enn Háleyske Þóresson, I. 8. 1: II. 3. 1: III. 5. 1-2: V. 15. 4.

Grímr Helgason á  Kálfskinne, III. 14. 11.

Grímr herser ór Sogne, see Veðrar-Grímr.

Grímr Hialdzson, Mant. 5. 5.

Grímr Hialtason, monk, Gm. 607, 612-13.

Grímr Holta-Skalle Þórsteinsson, V. 7. 6.

Grímr Hrafnsson, V. 12. 4.

Grímr Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

Grímr Ingiallzson, II. 5. 1-2.

Grímr Ingiallzson Grimssonar, p. 640. 17, 24.

Grímr Ioansson, I. 7. 4.

Grímr Kaogor, II. 24. 2.

Grímr Kolbiarnarson herser, III. 13. 2-3; 15. 1-2; 15. 4.

Grímr Loðin-kinne Ketilsson, II. 22. 2: III. 16. 1: Gen. A. 31; 34.

Grímr Loðmundarson (= f. of Svertingr, III. 15. 5 ?), II. 23. 2:
Gen. 1 (?).

Grímr Oddason, p. 642. 10, 22.

Grímr, f. of Svertingr, III. 15. 5 (= Grímr Loðmundarson ?).

Grímr Svertingsson of Mosfell, II. 4. 1: V. 9. 8; 16. 3: Mant. 5. 5:
Lib. 8. 3.

Grímr Tófoson (s. of Þórarinn Þórbiarnarson), V. 12. 1.

Grímr Þórgeirsson, II. 5. 14.

Griót-ár-menn, Nj. 367.

Griótgarðr Háleygja-iarl, V. 5. 1; 9. 7: Gen. A. 33 (? = Griótgarðr
iarl í Sóknardale).

Griótgarðr Hlaða-iarl, I. 7. 7: II. 23. 2; 24. 1; 24. 6: III. 14. 17;
16. 5: IV. 3. 1: V. 11. 2; 14. 1: Gen. B. 7.

Griótgarðr iarl í Sóknar-dale, Gen. A. 32 (= Griótgarðr Háleygja-iarl
?).

Gríss Gledill, III. 14. 5.

Gríss of Grísartunga, II. 4. 2.

Gríss Liótzson, III. 20. 4;  22. 1.

Gríss Sæmingsson, III. 5. 16.

Gróa Biarnardótter Byrðusmiors, III. 11. 5.

Gróa en Cristna Geirleifsdótter, II. 21. 2: Th. 7. 3.

Gróa Dala-Collzdótter, II. 15. 9.

Gróa Gizorardótter byscops, Hv. 2. 13; 2. 19: pp. 599, 601.

Gróa Hafþórsdótter, III. 14. 5.

Gróa Helgadótter, IV. 16. 2.

Gróa Herfinnzdótter, III. 9. 1.

Gróa Oddsdótter, II. 4. 13.

Gróa Síðo-Hallzdótter, Gen. B. 15.

Gróa en Skygna, III. 12. 2.

Gróa Þórðardótter Illoga, IV. 14. 4; 14. 10.

Gróa Þórólfsdótter Brækis, II. 22. 5.

Gróa Þórsteinsdótter Rauðs, II. 14. 1-2.

Gróa Þórvarðardótter frá Urðom, III. 12. 8.

Guðlaugr Ásbiarnarson, IV. 15. 3 [S].

Guðlaugr enn Auðge, see Goðlaugr.

Gunnarr Baugsson, V. 4. 4; 5. 2; 7. 1-2: Gen. 5.

Gunnarr Hámundarson frá  Hlíðarenda, IV. 7. 2; 18. 1: V. 4. 4; 5. 2;
7. 2; 7. 7-8; 8. 6: Gen. 5-6; 11.

Gunnar Hlifarson, I. 10. 3: II. 15. 14: IV. 17. 4: Lib. 5. 1.

Gunnarr, sister's son of Hróarr Tungo-Goðe, IV. 7. 2.

Gunnarr Nautatík, Od. 3. 1.

Gunnarr enn Spake Ulfheðinsson, Lib. 9. 3; 9. 6; 10. 7: Cr. 10. 7.

Gunnarr Ulfliótzson, III. 15. 7: Gen. B. 16: Lib. 2. 2.

Gunnarr Valbrandzson, II. 24. 8.

Gunnarr Þórsteinsson Tjaldstæðings, V. 8. 6.

Gunnarr, b. of Þórvaldr Croppin-skegge, Lib. 3. 2.

Gunnbiaorn Brynjolfsson ens Gamla, IV. 3. 5.

*Gunnbiaorn Erpsson, II. 15. 7.

Gunnbiaorn Gandr, II. 3. 9.

Gunnbiaorn Ulfsson Kráko, II. 7. 1; 12. 2; 26. 1.

Gunnfríðr Þórolfsdótter, Th. 8. 3.

Gunnhildr, w. of Kale, I. 10. 4.

Gunnhildr Ásláksdótter, II. 6. 4; 11. 7; 13. 1.

Gunnhildr Eiríksdótter or Goðdaolom, III. 6. 3; 8. 1.

Gunnhildr Ísroeðordótter, IV. 2. 3.

Gunnhildr konungamóðir, Gen. B. 15.

Gunnhildr Ormsdótter, Cr. 8. 7.

Gunnhildr Simonardótter, II. 6. 4.

Gunnhildr Þórsteinsdótter, p. 641. 1.

Gunnlaugr Hrólfsson, I. 8. 1.

Gunnlaugr munkr, Thorv.  5; 7: pp. 592-3; 414.

Gunnlaugr Ormstunga enn Gamle, Hrómundarson, I. 6. 4: II. 2. 1; 3. 1.

Gunnlaugr Ormstunga Illogason, III. 2. 3.

Gunnlaugr Steinþórsson, II. 8. 1: Gen. B. 13.

Gunnlaugr Þórbiarnarson, II. 7. 5-6.

Gunnlaugr Þóresson á Skalmarnese, Gen. B. 5.

Gunnolfr Croppa Þóresson Hauknefs, IV. 1. 1.

Gunnolfr enn Gamle Þórbiarnarson, III. 12. 8.

Gunnolfr i Hvamme, III. 8. 11.

Gunnsteinn Berserkja-bane Baolverksson, V. 9. 7: Gen. A. 10.

Gunnsteinn Eysteinsson, III. 14. 20.

Gunnsteinn Gunnbiarnarson, II. 26. 1.

Gunnsteinn á Gunnsteins-staoðom, III. 6. 1-2.

Gunnsteinn Hallzson, Gen. B. 20.

Gunnsteinn, f. of Þóra, II. 22. 5; (Þóríðr), 26. 5.

Gunnsteinn Þóresson Líno, IV. 8. 3.

Gunnvaldr Rauða-Biarnarson, II. 4. 5.

Gunnvaor Goðþormsdótter, I. 9. 4.

Gunnvaor Hroðgeirsdótter, V. 11. 5.

Guthormr Sigurðarson, I. 8. 1.

Gyða, w. of Ingialdr enn Tryggve, III. 15. 2.

Gyrðr iarl Sigvaldason, II. 5. 8.

Gyrðr, grandf. of Skialgr á Iaðre, III. 12. 7.

Gyríð, w. of Kolbein, Gm. 607.




H


Hafgrímr í Hafgrímsfirðe, II. 12. 9.

Hafliðe Mársson, II. 23. 2: III. 6. 3: Gen. B. 10; 13: Mant. 1. 3;
1. 6-7: Lib. 10. 9: Cr. 10. 7; 10. 10: Hv. 2. 18; 3. 13: pp. 598-601.

Hafliðe enn Orve Hrólfsson, III. 15. 10.

Hafliðe Þórgestzson, II. 11. 8.

Hafliðe Þórvallzson, abbot, Pol. 15. 2.

Haf-Liótr Þórbergsson, IV. 5. 4.

Hafnar-Ormr, I. 7. 2; 7. 11-13; 8. 3: V. 11. 5.

Hafr enn Auðge Þórkelsson, Gen. A. 33.

Hafr Brandzson, Gm. 608, 611.

Hafr Hámundarson, V. 7. 2.

Hafr Svertingsson, Hv. 4. 1.

Hafr Þórðarson Knapps, III. 12. 1.

Hafr-Biaorn Molda-Gnúpsson, I. 10. 3: IV. 17. 2-4: Hv. 4. 1.

Hafr-Biaorn Styrkársson, V. 16. 12.

Hafþóra Þórbergsdótter, I. 10. 7: III. 2. 3: V. 3. 4.

Hafþórr Víkingr, III. 14. 5-6.

Hagný Hakadótter, Mant. 276.

Halþórr Þórgeirsson, II. 4. 14.

Hake, a thrall of Ketilbiaorn Gamle, V. 14. 4.

Hake Hámundarson, king, Mant. 276.

Hákon Aðalsteins-fóstri, King of Norway, I. 7. 11: III. 17. 2:
Gen. B. 3.

Hákon galinn, b. of King Ingi, Pol. 13. 1.

Hákon á Hákonar-staoðom, IV. 3. 5.

Hákon iarl Griótgarðzson, II. 24. 6; 25. 1; 26. 6: III. 14. 17; 16. 5:
IV. 3. 1: V. 11. 2; 14. 1: Gen. B. 7.

Hákon Herðibreiðr, King of Norway, Hv. 5. 13.

Hákon Magnússon, King of Norway, Hv. 2. 20.

Hákon iarl enn Ríke, Sigurðarson, IV. 14. 1: Mant. 3. 1: Cr. 8. 12:
p. 417.

Hákon Sverresson, King of Norway, Pol. 7. 3; 15. 2: Gm. 613, 615.

Háleygja-ætt, IV. 11. 5.

Háleygr, King of Hálogaland, Gen. A. 32.

Háleygr Skiaoldolfsson, IV. 11. 5.

Hálfdan Fróðason, Gen. A. 1.

Hálfdan enn Gamle, IV. 14. 1.

Hálfdan Hvítbeinn Oleifsson, King of the Uplanders, II. 14. 1:
Lib. pr. 2; p. 306. 11.

Hálfdan enn Milde, Lib. pr. 2.

Hálfdan Sigurðarson, Lib. 9. 1.

Hálfdan enn Snialle, Gen. A. 1.

Hálfdan Svarte Goðroeðarson, King  of the Uplanders, V. 11. 1:
Mant. 5. 2: Lib. pr. 2; 1. 1.

Hálfr konungr Hiaorleifsson, II. 17. 1: Gen. A. 25: Mant. 274.

Hálfsreckar, II. 17. 1: Gen. A. 25.

Halla Eyjolfsdótter, II. 18. 1: Gen. B. 9.

Halla Flosadótter, p. 640. 8, 22.

Halla Gestzdótter Oddleifssonar, II. 15. 11; 21. 1.

Halla Grettisdótter, Gen. B. 5.

Halla Heðinsdótter, II. 28. 1: III. 9. 1.

Halla Iaorundardótter Hals, III. 6. 6.

Halla Iaorundardótter frá Keldom, IV. 3. 1: Mant. 5. 1: p. 640. 3, 5.

Halla Lýtingsdótter, IV. 3. 1: Gen. A. 28.

Halla Pólsdótter, Pol. 1. 8; 9. 2; 10. 1.

Halla Steinolfsdótter, II. 23. 3.

Halla Steinunnardótter, p. 639. 12.

Halla  Þórhallzdótter (al. Steinsdótter), mother of St. Thorlac,
V. 3. 2: Þorl. 2. 1; 6. 5.

Halla Þórkelsdótter, II. 20. 8.

Hallaðr iarl Raognvallzson, II. 20. 2: IV. 14. 2.

Hallbera Aradótter, Gen. B. 11.

Hallbera Broddadótter, Gen. B. 8; see Hallvaor Oddadótter.

Hallbera Grímsdótter, III. 2. 3.

Hallbera Hróallzdótter ens Rauða, Gen. A. 4.

Hallbera Ingigerðardótter, abbess, p. 640. 9, 22.

Hallbera Onundardótter, III. 19. 5.

Hallbera Rafnsdótter, III. 19. 5: p. 641. 44.

Hallbera Snorradótter Goða, II. 23. 2: Gen. B. 13.

Hallbera Snorradótter Magnússon, p. 641. 12, 24, etc.; 642. 6, etc.

Hallbera Snorradótter Þórðarsonar, II. 23. 2.

Hallbera Ulfsdótter, I. 8. 1.

Hallbera Þórgilsdótter, p. 641. 34.

Hallbera, w. of Þórgils Húnbogason, Gen. B. 10.

Hallbera Þóroddzdótter Hialms, III. 7. 1: Gen. A. 32: p. 642. 4.

Hallbiaorg, d. of Arnóra, p. 641. 19.

Hallbiaorg Bárðardótter, II. 15. 8.

Hallbiaorn Egilsson, IV. 2. 2.

Hallbiaorn, f. of Eyjolfr, II. 18. 1.

Hallbiaorn Half-troll, V. 4. 1: Gen. A. 31; 34.

Hallbiaorn Haorða-kappe, V. 10. 6.

Hallbiaorn Ioansson Loptzsonar, Od. 2. 2.

Hallbiaorn Oddzson of Kiðja-berg, I. 10. 3: II. 26. 2-3: V. 15. 2.

Hallbiaorn Oddzson Þórormssonar, III. 4. 1.

Hallbiaorn enn sterke, Gen. A. 29.

Halldís Erpsdótter, II. 15. 7; 15. 11.

Halldís Narfadótter, Gen. B. 10.

Halldís Þórgrímsdótter Harðrefssonar, II. 23. 2; 24. 1.

Halldóra Brandzdótter, Od. 2. 1.

Halldóra Einarsdótter, IV. 3. 1.

Halldóra Eyjolfsdótter, Hv. 5. 1.

Halldóra Geirmundardótter, I. 6. 4.

Halldóra Gunnsteinsdótter, III. 14. 20.

Halldóra Hialtadótter, V. 15. 2.

Halldóra Hrólfsdótter, I. 11. 1: Hv. 1. 1.

Halldóra Ormsdótter Aurga, V. 3. 7.

Halldóra Refsdótter, I. 6. 8.

Halldóra Snorradótter Goða, Gen. B. 13.

Halldóra Steinmóðsdótter, II. 15. 14: V. 13. 1.

Halldóra Þórhallzdótter, II. 15. 10.

Halldóra Þórkelsdótter ens Svarta, III. 17. 2.

*Halldor, a thrall of Hiaorleifr Hroðmarsson, I. 3. 4.

Halldórr Arnliótzson, III. 14. 19.

Halldórr Bersason, Gen. B. 10.

Halldórr Brandzson, II. 13. 1.

Halldórr Collsson, III. 2. 3.

Halldórr Egilsson, Cr. 10. 10.

Halldórr or Forsár-skógom, Gen. B. 15.

Halldórr Garpsdals-goðe Heðinsson, II. 18. 4.

Halldórr Goðmundar, son ens Ríka, Cr. 6. 3; 6 B*; 7. 1.

Halldórr Gunnbiarnarson, II. 26. 1.

Halldórr Hallvarðzson, priest, Gm. 606.

Halldórr Haognason, I. 7. 8.

Halldórr á Holms-látre Þórleifsson, II. II. 7; 13. 1.

Halldórr Illogason, I. 7. 6.

Halldórr Óleifsson Pá, II. 15. 9: Gen. B. 13.

Halldórr Ornolfsson, IV. 18. 6.

Halldórr  Snorrason  Goða, II. 20. 2: III. 6. 4: Gen. B. 13:
pp. 641. 23; 642. 5.

Halldórr Þóresson, II. 29. 3.

Halldórr Þórgeirsson frá Hofe, III. 7. 1; 11. 2.

Halle enn Hvíte, III. 15. 8.

Halle Ormsson, III. 15. 8.

Halle enn Sterke Onundarson, Gen. A. 12.

Hallfríðr Egilsdótter, IV. 2. 2.

Hallfríðr Einarsdótter, p. 642. 5.

Hallfríðr Snorradótter, Lib. 305. 18: Hv. 3. 1.

Hallfríðr Þórbiarnardótter frá Vatne, II. 15. 8-9; 20. 7
(al. Biarnardótter or Biarnar-firðe).

Hallfríðr, w. of Tanne, Ch. 630.

Hallfroeðr Vandræða-skáld Óttarsson, III. 5. 16: Cr. 6. 3; 7. 2.

*Hallgeirr í Hallgeirsey, V. 4. 7; 7. 3-4.

Hallgeirr Þórgeirsson, IV. 3, 4.

Hallgerðr Hólmsteinsdótter, IV. 5. 2.

Hallgerðr Haoscullzdótter Snuin-bróc (Lang-bróc), II. 15. 8-9; 26. 3:
Gen. A. 35.

Hallgerðr Narfadótter, Gen. B. 10.

Hallgerðr Ornolfsdótter, II. 20. 9.

Hallgerðr Tungo-Oddzdótter, I. 10. 3: II. 26. 2-3.

Hallgerðr Vermundardótter ens Mióva, II. 23. 2.

Hallgerðr Þórolfsdótter, I. 6. 5.

Hallgils Þórbrannzson, III. 20. 5.

Hallgrímr  Brynjolfsson ens Gamla, IV. 3. 5.

Hallgrímr Sviðbalke Bárðarson, V. 3. 7.

Hallgrímr Valbrannzson, II. 24. 8.

Hallkatla Biarnardótter, II. 21. 1.

Hallkatla Einarsdótter, p. 640. 18.

Hallkatla Rafnsdótter, p. 639. 3.

Hallkatla Þiðrandadótter, Gen. A. 19; B. 15.

Hallkell Hallkelsson, V. 15. 2.

Hallkell í Hólom, b. of Ketilbiaorn enn Gamle, II. 26. 3: V. 15. 2:
Gen. A. 15.

Hallkell Hrosskelsson of Hallkelsstaðir, I. 7. 10: II. 2. 1; 6. 4;
13. 1.

Hallkell Oddzson, V. 15. 2.

Hallormr á Cárns-á, III. 5. 10.

Hallr Biarnason, V. 15. 2.

Hallr, f. of Finnr Laogsaogomaðr, IV. 5. 4.

Hallr Geirolfsson, III. 18. 4.

Hallr Gizorarson, II. 20. 8: Pol. 2. 1; 7. 2.

Hallr Goðmundarson, II. 15. 9b: Gen. B. 2.

Hallr, f. of Gunnsteinn, Gen. B. 10.

Hallr í Hauka-dale Þórarensson, V. 13. 4: Lib. 9. 2; 10. 10: Cr. 4. 3:
Io. 3. 3.

Hallr á Hofstaoðom, II. 17. 5.

Hallr Mió-doelingr Bárðarson, III. 12. 3.

Hallr Óroekioson, Lib. 3. 2.

Hallr Rafnsson, abbot, III. 19. 5: Þorl. 15. 2.

Hallr af Síðo, see Síðo-Hallr.

Hallr Styrmesson, III. 7. 4: Gen. B. 11.

Hallr Teitsson Ísleifssonar, III. 14. 19: IV. 3. 7; 14. 4: Gen. B. 10;
15: Lib. 9. 2: Cr. 10. 8; 10. 10: Hv. 3. 7; 4. 10; 5. 1: pp. 598-601.

Hallr Víga-Styrsson, II. 15. 8.

Hallr Þóresson, I. 4. 4.

Hallsteinn Atlason ens Mióva, V. II. 2; see Hásteinn.

Hallsteinn á Framnese, V. II. 3.

Hallsteinn Gnúpsson á Hialla, V. 9. 8.

Hallsteinn Hestr, III. 15. 2; 15. 4.

Hallsteinn Þengilsson, III. 16. 2.

Hallsteinn Þórbiarnarson Digra, II. 7. 5-6.

Hallsteinn Þorskafiarðar goðe Þórolfsson Mostrar-skeggs, II. 10. 5;
15. 12; 20. 1: Th. 3. 2; 6. 1-2; 7. 5: Lib. 4. 2.

Hallvarðr Hallkelsson, V. 15. 2: Mant. I.  2.

Hallvarðr Harðfare, I. 8. 1: V. 4. 1.

Hallvarðr enn Helge, Gen. B. 5.

Hallvarðr, f. of Márr, II. 15. 14: Th. 11. 4.

Hallvarðr, f. of Oddr, V. 12. 3.

Hallvarðr Súgande, II. 24. 3; 24. 6.

Hallveig Biarnardótter, V. 7. 6.

Hallveig Einarsdótter, II. 6. 4: p. 642. 16.

Hallveig Fróðadóttir, I. 3. 10.

Hallveig Oddzdótter, II. 20. 2.

Hallveig Tinnzdótter, II. 13. 1.

Hallveig Þórbiarnardótter, I. 6. 6.

Hallveig Þórgrímsdótter, II. 15. 10.

Hallveig Þórviðardótter, V. 10. 5; 12. 1.

Hallvaor Oddadótter, II. 17. 6: Gen. B. 8 (Hallbera Broddadótter). =
Hallvaor Þórhallzdótter, II. 20. 6.

Hals Þóresson, III. 17. 2.

Hamall Sigurðarson, I. 3. 10.

Hamall Þórmóðsson, I. 3. 10: III. 6. 6.

Hamar-byggjar, II. 3. 6.

Hámundr Gunnarsson Baugssonar, IV. 7. 2; 18. 1: V. 4. 4; 5. 2; 7. 2;
7. 7; 8. 6: Gen. 5. 11.

Hámundr Gunnarsson frá Hlíðarenda, V. 7. 8.

Hámundr enn Halte Hróarsson Tungo-Goða, IV. 7. 2 ; 18. 1-2: Gen. 5.

Hámundr Heljarskinn Hiaorsson, II. 17. 2; 22. 2: III. 14. 1-2;
14. 8-11; 15. 6; 15. 9: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 25: Mant. 274-7.

Hámundr Tyrfingsson í Goðdaolom, V. 11. 4.

Haraldr Egða-konungr, Mant. 5. 3.

Haraldr Gille, King of Norway, Hv. 4. 3; 4. 11-12: Þorl. 1. 1.

Haraldr Goðinason, King of England, Hv. 1. 12.

Haraldr Goðroeðarson, Lib. 8. 4.

Haraldr Goll-skeggr, King of Sogn, III. 6. 1: V. 11. 1: Mant. 5. 2.

Haraldr Gormsson, King of Denmark, Cr. 3. 1: Thorv. 2.

Haraldr Gráfeldr, King of Norway, Mant. 3. 1.

Haraldr enn Harðráðe Sigurðarson, King of Norway, Mant. 1. 1; 3. 2;
5. 4: Lib. 9. 1; 9. 4: Hv. 1. 9; 1. 11-12; 2. 2; 2. 14; 2. 16:
Io. 1. 1; 4. 5: p. 596.

Haraldr enn Hárfagri, King of Norway, I. 1. 1; 3. 6; 4. 5; 8. 1:
II. 4. 1; 4. 3; 5. 9; 9. 1; 10. 1 ; 17. 3; 22. 1-2; 23. 1; 24. 3;
27. 1; 28. 1; 28. 4; 29. 1; 30. 1: III. 5. 2; 15. 2; 15. 4: IV. 2. 1;
7. 1; 14. 1-3: V. 1. 1; 3. 4; 4. 1; 8. 2; 9. 1; 11. 1-2; 12. 5;
15. 1; 16. 4-5: Gen. B. 5: Th. 1. 2-3; 2. 1-2; 3. 2: Mant. 5. 2;
5. 5: p. 275: Lib. pr. 2; 1. 1-4; 3. 4; 7. 1; 8. 4; 9. 1.

Haraldr Hildetaonn, King of the Danes, V. 3. 1: Gen. A. 1; B. 16.

Haraldr Hringr, III. 3. 1.

Haraldr iarl í Orkneyjom, Pol. 1. 4; 15. 2.

Haraldr Unge Halfdanarson, King of Sogn, V. 11. 1: Mant. 5. 2.

Haraldr Víkingr, III. 12. 7.

Harðrefr Ingiallzson, II. 23. 2-3; 24. 1.

Hardvig, archbishop in Magdeburg, Hv. 2. 4: Io. 6. 1.

Hárekr Hildiríðarson, V. 4. 1.

Hárekr Upplendinga-iarl, III. 12. 4.

Harre Helgason, III. 4. 2.

Há-Snorre Oddzson, II. 29. 3.

Hásteinn Atlason, I. 3. 2; V. 11. 2-3; 12. 2;  17. 2.

Hásteinn Hrómundarson, II. 30. 3-4: III. 5. 16.

Haugud', see Hoggvandill.

Haukr, berserk, Cr. 2. 1: Thorv. 5.

Haukr Egilsson, Gen. A. 12.

Haukr Erlendzson, laogmaðr, V. 17. 1: Mant. 5. 1: p. 639. 13, 15.

Haukr Hábrók, Th. 2. 2.

Haukr at Hauk-staoðom, III. 6. 3.

Haukr Ketilsson, Gen. B. 10.

Hávarðr i Fellsmúla Þóresson Leðr-hals, III. 17. 2.

Hávarðr Griótgarðzson, V. 5. 1.

Hávarðr enn Halte, II. 18. 2; 24. 2; 24. 8.

Hávarðr Hegre í Hegranese, III. 8. 2-3.

Hávarr Cleppsson (al. Einarsson Clepps­sonar), I. 7. 3: II. 15. 11:
Gen. B. 12.

Healte, see Hialte.

Heðinn, f. of Arndís, III. 9. 1.

Heðinn Arnmóðsson, III. 3. 1.

Heðinn Gilsson Skeiðar-nefs, II. 18. 4.

Heðinn, f. of Halla, III. 9. 1.

Heðinn at Heðins-haofða Þórsteinsson Þurs, III. 6. 6; 18. 2.

Heðinn enn Milde Þórbiarnarson, III. 15. 12: Cr. 2. 4; 2. 7.

Heðinn or Miolu, III. 14. 20.

Heðinn í Sóknadal, III. 15. 2.

Heðinn Þórfinnzson, IV. 3. 3.

Heggr Þóresson, V. 16. 7.

Heiðr volva, III. 5. 1.

Heimer iarl í Hlymdaolom, Mant. 5. 1.

Heimlaug Þórarensdótter, V. 10. 6.

Heinrekr, foreign bishop, Mant. 6. 1-2: Lib. 8. 1: Hv. 1. 11.

Heinrekr Conraðsson, emperor, Hv. 1. 3.

Heinrekr, King of England, Hv. 4. 12: Þorl. 15. 1.

Helga Árnadótter, I. 7. 5.

Helga Arnardottir, I. 3. 1-2, 4.

Helga Ásgeirsdótter, V. 3. 2.

Helga Biarnadótter, p. 640. 41.

Helga Biólfsdótter, IV. 10. 1.

Helga Ceallacsdótter, II. 8. 1; 9. 4: Th. 7. 3.

Helga Einarsdótter, Gen. B. 15.

Helga Erlingsdótter Knýtis, III. 13. 2.

Helga Helgadótter Hoengssonar, V. 4. 3; 4. 7.

Helga Helgadótter ens Magra, III. 15. 8-9; Gen. A. 32: Lib. 305. 21.

Helga, w. of Herjolfr and Brynjolfr, IV. 5. 2.

Helga Holmsteinsdótter, IV. 5. 2.

Helga Hrólfsdótter Rauðskeggs, V. 7. 9 (see Helga Þórsteinsdótter
Rauðnefs).

Helga Iónsdótter, V. 16. 2.

Helga Ketilsdótter prests, p. 641. 22, etc.

Helga Óleifsdótter Feilans, II. 15. 14: Lib. 5. 1.

Helga Onundardótter Bílds, V. 7. 5.

Helga Onundardótter, sister of Skáld-Hrafn, II. 6. 4.

Helga Ormsdótter, V. 12. 3.

Helga Steingrímsdótter, p. 639. 14.

Helga Steinolfsdótter, Gen. B. 9.

Helga Steinsdótter, II. 8. 5.

Helga Vémundardótter, Gen. B. 16.

Helga Þórðardótter Magnússonar, pp. 639. 2; 640. 29; 641. 6.

Helga Þórðardótter Narfasonar, Gen. B. 10.

Helga Þórðardótter Skeggja, I. 4. 3: III. 8. 1: V. 14. 1:
Gen. A. 13-14; B. 7.

Helga Þóresdótter Þórkelssonar, II. 30. 3-4.

Helga Þórgeirsdótter frá Fiske-loek, III. 15. 11; 20. 2.

Helga Þórgeirsdótter frá Odda, V. 7. 5; 8. 7.

Helga Þórgeirsdótter frá Víðe-mýre, II. 4. 5.

Helga Þórláksdótter, II. 1. 6.

Helga Þóroddzdótter, p. 640. 23.

Helga Þórsteinsdótter Rauðnefs, V. 7. 10; 9. 4 (see Helga Hrólfsdótter
Rauðskeggs).

Helga Þróndardótter Mioksiglanda, V. 12. 5.

Helge Ásbiarnarson, IV. 6. 3: Cr. 1. 2.

Helge Ásgeirsson, II. 3. 4.

Helge Ásgeirsson Grímssonar, V. 12. 4.

Helge Biarnarson Buno, I. 4. 1: IV. 14. 10: Gen. A. 25: Mant. 5. 5.

Helge Biartmársson, II. 22. 3.

Helge Biolan Ketilsson, I. 4. 5; 5. 1; 6. 4: II. 14. 6: V. 17. 2;
17. 5: Th. 1. 1; 5. 1: p. 327. 15: Cr. 3. 5: Thorv. 7.

Helge Blá-fauskr Hrafnsson, V. 3. 1.

Helge Bun-hauss, IV. 3. 7.

Helge Droplaugarson, Gen. A. 19; B. 15.

Helge Dýr Skefilsson, V. 12. 4.

Helge Eyjolfsson, II. 23. 2.

Helge Eyvindarson enn Magre, II. 14. 1; 18. 7; 19. 1; 20. 8; 23. 2;
26. 2: III. 13. 2-3; 14. 1-5; 14. 8; 14. 10-11; 14. 13; 14. 19;
15. 4-12; 16. 2; 18. 2; 20. 1: V. 17. 2; 17. 5: Gen. A. 25; 32; B. 16:
Th. 1. 4: Mant. 275: Lib. 2. 1; 305. 20.

Helge Groenlendinga-byscop, Mant. 6. 1.

Helge Hallzson, I. 4. 4.

Helge Hámundarson, V. 7. 2.

Helge Helgason Biarnarsonar Buno, IV. 14. 10; 15. 1: Mant. 5. 5.

Helge Hestr, III. 19. 5.

Helge Heyangrs-Biarnarson, IV. 15. 4.

Helge Haognason, II. 3. 2.

Helge Hoengsson, V. 4. 3; 4. 7; 7. 3.

Helge Haoscullzson, II. 15. 9.

Helge Hrogn Ceallacsson, II. 16. 1.

Helge Hrogn Ketilsson, V. 7. 10; 9. 4.

Helge Hrólfsson or Gnúpofelle, II. 24. 6.

Helge Hrólfsson, í Hofgaorðom, II. 5. 11.

Helge af Hvanneyre, II. 7. 2.

Helge, f. of Ióra, II. 21. 1.

Helge Ketilsson ens Auðga, V. 3. 6.

Helge of Lundr, II. 3. 8.

Helge Narfason, III. 14. 11.

Helge Óleifsson, Norwegian king, II. 14. 1: Gen A. 35-36: Th. 1. 4:
Lib. 306. 12.

Helge Ósvífsson, Gen. B. 3.

Helge Óttarsson, II. 9. 3; 21. 2: Gen. B. 3: Th. 7. 3.

Helge Rauða-Biarnarson, II. 4. 5.

Helge Skarfr (al. Skrápr) Geirleifsson, I. 6. 8: II. 21. 1.

Helge Skaptason, Hv. 5. 13.

Helge enn Svarte, V. 4. 5.

Helge Trauste Óláfsson, V. 12. 3-4.

Helge Valþiófsson, III. 15. 10.

Helge Vestarsson, IV. 16. 2.

Helge Vésteinsson, II. 23. 1.

Helge Þórsteinsson, III. 4. 1.

Helge Þórvallzson, III. 4. 2.

Helgo-Steinarr Þórarensson, II. 17. 4: III. 21. 3.

Hella-Biaorn, see Skialda-Biaorn.

Hellisfirðingar, IV. 10. 4.

Helliss-menn, I. 10. 2: II. 2. 2.

Hello-Narfe Ásbrannzson, III. 14. 10-11.

Herdís Bolladótter Bollasonar, II. 21. 2: Gen. B. 14.

Herdís Bolladótter Þórleikssonar, II. 15. 8.

Herdís Coðransdótter, p. 641. 36.

Herdís Haofða-Þórðardótter, III. 6. 6; 11. 2: Gen. A. 32.

Herdís Hrafnsdótter, pp. 639. 12; 640. 19.

Herdís Ketilsdótter, Pol. 1. 3; 1. 8; 2. 4; 4. 5; 6. 3; 9. 2; 10. 1;
10. 3; p. 641. 4.

Herdís, m. of Steinn the poet, II. 9. 3.

Herdís Sveinbiarnardótter, II. 20. 8.

Herdis Tinnzdótter, II. 23. 2.

Herfiðr Gilsson Skeiðar-nefs, II. 18. 7.

Herfiðr Þórgilsson, f. of Skialda-Biaorn, II. 28. 1; III. 9. 1.

Hergils Hnapp-raz Þróndarson, II. 17. 4; 18. 6; 19. 1; 21. 6.

Hergrímr Þórgilsson, III. 9. 1.

Herjolfr, kinsman of Ingolfr  Arnarson, II. 2. 7: V. 16. 11.

Herjolfr, one of Flóke's followers, I. 2. 3.

Herjolfr Bárðarson of Herjolfsnes, II. 12. 7; 12. 9: V. 16. 11.

Herjolfr Bárðarson i Vestmannaeyjum, V. 3. 7.

Herjolfr í Breiðdal, IV. 11. 3.

Herjolfr í Breiðdal Þórgeirsson, III. 14. 10.

Herjolfr Eyvindarson Ellz, II. 15. 10: Gen. A. 35.

Herjolfr Hoengsson, V. 4. 6-7.

Herjolfr Hornabriótr, V. 2. 1.

Herjolfr enn Hvíte, Gen. A. 25.

Herjolfr Sigurðarson (Holkin-raze), II. 7. 7-8: Th. 8. 3.

Herjolfr Þóresson at Mývatne, III. 17. 2.

Herjolfr Þórgeirsson i Heydaolom, IV. 5. 1-3; 11. 4.

Herlaugr Kveld-Ulfsson, V. 16. 9.

Hermundr Coðransson, Gen. B. 14: Pol. 15. 2.

Hermundr Eyvindarson Soerkves, III. 5. 8; 5. 16.

Hermundr Holkinn (al. Hokinn), II. 30. 3.

Hermundr Illogason ens Svarta, III. 2. 3: Gen. B. 14: Cr. 1. 5; 8. 7:
p. 641. 11.

Hermundr á Mýre, I. 26. 4.

Herríðr Gautzdótter, II. 17. 6.

Herroeðr iarl á Gautlande, Gen. B. 5: Mant. 5. 1.

Herroeðr, f. of Svana, II. 8. 1.

Herroeðr Hvika-timbr (al. Hvítaský), II. 28. 4.

Hersteinn Atlason, I. 3. 2: V. 11. 2.

Hersteinn Blund-Cetilsson, II. 15. 14: (Þorkelsson) Lib. 5. 1.

Hervaor, w. of Veðrar-Grímr, I. 4. 1: Gen. A. 32 (here called his
mother).

Herþrúðr Illogadótter ens Ramma, II. 11. 7.

Herþrúðr Þórmóðsdótter, II. 6. 4.

Hesta-Geller, II. 30. 3.

Heyjangrs-Biaorn Helgason, herser, III. 17. 1: IV. 15. 1; 15. 4-5:
V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 25: Mant. 5. 5.

Hialdr Vatnarsson konungs, Mant. 5. 4.

Hiallcar, a freedman of Án Rauðfeldr, II. 22. 4.

Hialmgerðr, m. of Ásgeirr Rauðfeldr and Baoðmóðr Gerper, III. 14. 10.

Hialmolfr i Blaondo-hlíð, III. 8. 4.

Hialmon-Gautr, III. 16. 1.

Hialmr Ásbjarnarson, Gm. 608.

Hialp, wife of OErlygr Hrappsson, I. 6. 4.

Hialtasyner, III. 10. 1-2; 11. 5: V. 17. 4 (cf. Þórðr and Þórvaldr).

Hialte i Breiðdal, IV. 11. 2.

Hialte enn Hugprúðe, III. 2. 2.

Hialte prestr, Io. 12. 2.

Hialte Skeggjason, I. 11. 1: V. 9. 6; 9. 12; 13. 4: Gen. B. 7:
Lib. 7. 1, etc.: Cr. 1. 2; 4. 3; 6. 1, etc.; 7. 1; 8. 1, etc.:
Hv. 1. 1.

Hialte Þórðarson Skapls, III. 9. 2; 10. 1-2; 20. 3.

Hialte Þórðarson, b. of Þórbiaorn Ongull, III. 11. 2 n.

Hialte Þórkelsson, II. 15. 7.

Hilder Eysteinsson, IV. 16. 4-5.

Hilder enn Gamle Geirleifsson, Gen. A. 21.

Hilder Helgason, IV. 15. 4.

*Hilder or Hildis-ey, V. 4. 7; 7. 3-4.

Hilder Parrak, IV. 16. 4.

Hildiglúmr Rúnolfsson, Gen. A. 17.

Hildigunnr Beinisdótter, II. 6. 1-2.

Hildigunnr Starkaðardótter Þórðarsonar, Gen. A. 25: Nj. 364. 4;
365. 4; 367. 17.

Hildigunnr Starkaðardótter, lækner, Gen. A. 4.

Hildigunnr Þórsteinsdótter Titlings, Gen. A. 4.

Hildiríðar-synir, I. 8. 1: V. 4. 1 (see Hárekr and Hroerekr).

Hildr, a nun, Io. 12. 2.

Hildr Ásbiarnardótter, IV. 16. 1.

Hildr Baugsdótter, V. 7. 1.

Hildr Hermundardótter, III. 5. 16.

Hildr, sister of Ketill Þistill, III. 22. 2.

Hildr en Mióva Haognadótter, II. 17. 1.

Hildr Ormarsdóttir, I. 4. 4 (see Hildr Ulfarsdótter).

Hildr Skeggjadótter, V. 2. 2.

Hildr Stiarna Þórvallzdótter, II. 3. 4.

Hildr Ulfarsdótter (= Hildr Ormarsdótter, I. 4. 4): V. 10. 3; 10. 5.

Hildr Þóresdótter, IV. 16. 1.

Hildr Þórsteinsdótter ens Rauða, Gen. B. 12 = Þórhildr Þórsteinsd.

Hildr Þráinsdótter Svarta-þurs, III. 14. 5.

Hior, see Hiaorr.

Hiaorleifr Einarsson, see Hrolleifr Einarsson.

Hiaorleifr Goðe Skoftason, II. 5. 6.

Hiaorleifr Haorða-konungr enn Kvensame Hiaorsson, II. 17. 1:
Gen. A. 25. 38; B. 12: Mant. 274.

Hiaorleifr Hroðmarsson, I. 3. 1-7: IV. 18. 6.

Hiaorr, f. of Fleinn the poet, V. 2. 1.

Hiaorr Gnúpa-Bárðarson, IV. 15. 5.

Hiaorr konungr Hálfsson, II. 17. 1-2: III. 14. 11: Gen. A. 25:
Mant. 274, 276.

Hiaortr Hámundarson, V. 7. 2; 7. 7: Gen. 5.

Hlenne Ásmundarson, II. 21. 1.

Hlenne enn Gamle Ormsson, III. 16. 1: Gen. A. 31: Cr. 1. 3; 8. 7.

Hlíf, m. of Gunnarr, II. 15. 14.

Hlíf Heðinsdótter, III. 14. 19.

Hlíf Helgadótter ens Magra, III. 15. 11.

Hlíf Hesta-gellder, II. 5. 9.

Hlíf Hrólfsdótter, III. 13. 1-2.

Hlíf Torf-Einarsdótter, Gen. B. 7.

Hloðver Hloðversson (Louis II), Roman emperor, I. 1. 1.

Hnake Ásbiarnarson ens Auðga, II. 15. 1.

Hnappfellingar, IV. 15. 3.

Hof-Colle, see Colle Hróallzson.

Haofþa-Þórðr Biarnarson Byrða-smiaors, II. 15. 14: III. 5. 12; 6. 6;
7. 1; 9. 2; 11. 1-3; 11. 5: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 32: Cr. 2. 2.

Hofsfellingar, IV. 14. 6.

Hofsmenn, III. 5. 12.

Haogne Geirþiófsson, II. 22. 5.

Haogne Halldórsson, II. 3. 2.

Haogne enn Hvíte Óblauðsson, II. 17. 1: 19. 1; 20. 2; 21. 1; 27. 1:
Gen. A. 38 (Ótryggsson), Gen. B. 12 (id.).

Haogne Ingimundarson ens Gamla, III. 5. 3; 5. 13; 5. 16.

Haogne í Niarðey, II. 17. 1.

Haogne Þórmóðarson, Od. 3. 1; 4. 3.

Hoggvandill (?) Gunnarsson, II. 15. 14 (Haugud', MS.).

Holbarke, see Þórvaldr Holbarke Ísroeðarson.

Holmfastr Véþormsson, IV. 4. 2: V. 15. 1.

Holmgaongo-Berse Véleifsson, II. 4. 3.

Holmgaongo-Hrafn, II. 12. 1.

Holmgaongo-Máne, III. 6. 5.

Holmgaongo-Starre Eiríksson, III. 6. 3; 8. 1.

Holmkell Alfvarensson, II. 7. 3.

Holms-menn, the outlaws in Geirshólme, I. 9. 1; 10. 2.

Holm-Starre = Starre Þórgestz son of Holm.

Holmsteinn Atlason, I. 3. 2: V. 11. 2.

Holmsteinn Bersason, IV. 5. 2.

Holmsteinn, s. of Helga Holmsteinsdótter, IV. 5. 2.

Holmsteinn Snæbiarnarson, II. 26. 2.

Holta-þórer Þórgeirsson, V. 3. 3; Gen. A. 8-9; 11-12; 20.

Holte á Holta-staoðom, III. 6. 4.

Hoengr, see Ketill Hoengr.

Hoensa-þórer, II. 2. 5: Lib. 5. 1.

Haorða-Káre Ásláksson Bifrakára, I. 3. 2: III. 11. 5: IV. 13. 1:
Gen. B. 15-16: Lib. 2. 2.

Haorðr Grímkelsson, I. 6. 6; 9. 1; 10. 5.

Haorðr í Haorða-dal, II. 15. 3-4: III. 2. 3.

Hornfirðingar, IV. 14. 5.

Haosculldr Alfvarensson, II. 7. 3.

Haosculldr Arason, Gm. 612.

Haosculldr Atlason, II. 22. 5.

Haosculldr Bollason, II. 15. 8.

Haosculldr Dala-Collsson, II. 15. 8-10; 20. 7: III. 11. 2: Gen. A. 35.

Haosculldr enn Hvíte Ingiallzson, Gen. A. 10.

Haosculldr Iæknir, II. 23. 2.

Haosculldr Nialsson, Gen. A. 10.

Haosculldr Þórgeirsson Goða, III. 18. 1: p. 380. 9.

Haosculldr Þórsteinsson Þurs, III. 18. 2.

Haosculldr Þráinsson, Nj. 364-7.

Hrafn Dýrason, II. 23. 1.

Hrafn Eyvindarson, IV. 10. 2.

Hrafn Hafnar-lykill, IV. 18. 4.

Hrafn enn Heimske Valgarzson, V. 3. 1; 6. 1; 17. 2: Gen. 1.

Hrafn Hlymreks-fare Oddzson, II. 15. 14; 18. 1; 19. 2: Gen. B. 9.

Hrafn Hoengsson, V. 4. 2; 4. 7; 6. 2; 8. 7; 17. 4: Gen. A. 5; 18:
Lib. 3. 4.

Hrafn í Hrafnsfirðe, II. 12. 9.

Hrafn, f. of Hrafnkell, IV. 6. 1.

Hrafn Oddsson, herra, see Rafn.

Hrafn Skefilsson, V. 12. 4.

Hrafn Sveinbiarnarson, II. 20. 8; 22. 5: Gm. 610, 612-5: p. 640. 18.

Hrafn Ulfheðinsson, Hv. 4. 12: p. 641. 43.

Hrafn Þórviðarson, V. 11. 5;  12. 2.

Hrafna-Flóke, see Flóke Vilgerðarson.

Hrafnhildr Ketilsdótter Hoengs, V. 4. 1.

Hrafnhildr Stórolfsdótter, V. 4. 4; 7. 2: Gen. 5.

Hrafnkell Goðe Þóresson, IV. 6. 3: V. 17. 1: Gen. A. 30.

Hrafnkell Hrafnsson, IV. 6. 1-3: Gen. A. 30 (Hrafnkell Raumr).

Hrafse Liótolfsson, II. 16. 2.

Hrane (= Hrane Grímsson?), II. 3. 5.

Hrane Grímsson, I. 10. 6.

Hrane Hildesson, IV. 16. 4.

Hrappr Biarnarson Buno, I. 4. 1-2; 6. 1: Gen. A. 13-14; B. 7:
Mant. 5. 5.

Hrappr Eysteinsson Meinfrets, II. 15. 11: III. 1. 1.

Hrappr, f. of Geirleifr, III. 14. 14; 19. 5.

Hrappr Hallgeirsson á Forsvelle, IV. 3. 4.

Hrappr Helgason, I. 5. 1.

Hrappr, f. of Hroðgeirr enn Hvíte, IV. 1. 3.

Hrappr, f. of Sumarliðe, II. 15. 7.

Hraundæler, II. 4. 13.

Hrefna Ásgeirsdótter, II. 15. 9; 29. 1: Gen. B. 4-5.

Hreiðarr, f. of Ulfr Kráka, II. 6. 5.

Hreiðarr, thrall of Laugarbrecko-Einarr, II. 6. 2.

Hreinn Hermundarson, Gen. B. 14: Od. 3. 2: p. 641. 11.

Hreinn Styrmesson, abbot, Hv. 5. 13: Io. 12. 5: pp. 593; 641. 11.

Hrifla (= Rifla Þórsteinsson?), II. 3. 4.

Hríseyjar-Narfe Þróndarson, III. 12. 7.

Hróalldr Biolan, IV. 2. 3.

Hróalldr, f. of Colle, II. 4. 15;  20. 7.

Hróalldr Eiríksson, III. 8. 1.

Hróalldr Eiríksson Orðigskeggja, Gen. A. 28; 33 = Geirmundr Eiríkson
Orðigskeggja, III. 8. 1.

Hróalldr Geirmundarson, III. 8. 1 = Geirmundr Hróallzson, Gen. A. 28.

Hróalldr or Haddingja-dal, II. 5. 1: V. 11. 4.

Hróalldr Haoscullzson, III. 18. 2.

Hróalldr Hrollaugsson Hryks, Gen. A. 32.

Hróalldr Hrollaugsson Raognvallzsonar, IV. 14. 4.

Hróalldr Hrómundarson, I. 3. 1.

Hróalldr Loðmundarson, IV. 19. 3.

Hróalldr Oddbiarnarson, V. 4. 3.

Hróalldr enn Rauðe, Gen. A. 4.

Hróalldr Ryggr Ásleiksson, III. 11. 1 (= Hrollaugr Hrykkr, Gen. A. 32).

Hróaldr Ulfsson, I. 11. 2  (but cf. II. 17. 6).

Hróarr (al. Þórbergr), f. of Áslákr í Langadal, II. 13. 1.

Hróarr Haofða-Þórðarson, III. 11. 1.

Hróarr Horn Brunason, IV. 18. 7.

Hróarr Unason Tungo-Goðe, I. 2. 2: IV. 7. 2-3; 18. 1-2: Gen. 5.

Hróarr, see also Róarr.

Hroðgeirr enn Hvíte Hrappsson, IV. 1. 3; 3. 1.

*Hroðgeirr enn Spake, I. 7. 12: V. 11. 5.

Hroðgeirr Þórsteinsson, V. 11. 5.

Hroðlaugr, see Hrollaugr.

Hroðmarr Hróallzson, I. 3. 1.

Hróðný Haoscullzdótter, Gen. A. 10.

Hróðný Illogadótter, II. 21. 1.

Hróðný Ketilsdótter Bifro, I. 3. 1.

Hróðný Ketilsdótter Kappa, II. 7. 5-6.

Hróðný, d. of Miðfiarðar-Skegge, II. 15. 14: III. 2. 3: Gen. A. 37.

Hróðný Unadótter, III. 5. 12.

Hroðolfr, a bishop, I. 7. 6: Lib. 8. 1.

Hroðrekr, see Roðrekr.

Hróe, s. of Arnkatla, IV. 19. 3.

Hróe enn Skarpe, III. 22. 1.

Hrókr enn Svarte, Mant. 275.

Hrólfr frá Ám, III. 13. 1.

Hrólfr enn Digre Eyvindarson, II. 5. 11.

Hrólfr Helgason ens Magra, of Gnúpo-fell, II. 18. 7; 24. 6:
III. 14. 1.; 15. 10; 16. 1; 18. 2; 21. 1.

Hrólfr Helgason, of Hofgarðar, II. 5. 11.

Hrólfr herser (= Hrólfr herser af Ogðom?), I. 7. 7.

Hrólfr herser af Ögðom, II. 9. 4; 17. 3; 18. 1: Gen. B. 9: Th. 7. 3.

Hrólfr Hoeggvande, IV. 17. 1.

Hrólfr Hróallzson enn Yngre (al. Ceallacsson), of Ballará, I. 11. 2;
II. 4: II. 1. 1; 17. 6; 20. 6.

Hrólfr Ingiallzson, III. 13. 1.

Hrólfr Ketilsson Kiólfara, I. 8. 1.

Hrólfr Krake, King of Denmark, III. 2. 2.

Hrólfr Móðolfsson, IV. 7. 3; 15. 6.

Hrólfr Nefja, IV. 14. 1.

Hrólfr enn Rauð-senzke Þórbiarnarson, II. 21. 3; 26. 4.

Hrólfr Rauðskeggr, III. 17. 2: V. 7. 9.

Hrólfr konungr Svásason, í Berge, IV. 12. 1: Gen. B. 16.

Hrólfr Ulfsson enn Auðge of Geitland, I. 8. 2; 11. 1: II. 1. 2:
Hv. 1. 1.

Hrollaugr Hrykkr Biarnarson Iarn-síðo, Gen. A. 32 (= Hróaldr Hryggr
Ásleiksson, III. 11. 1).

Hrollaugr  Raognvallzson  Mæra-iarls, IV. 12. 2; 14. 2-7; 14. 9-10:
V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 19; B. 10: Lib. 2. 1: p. 305. 11.

Hrolleifr Einarsson, V. 9. 8 (Hiaorleifr); 16. 3: Mant. 5. 5.

Hrolleifr enn Mikle Arnallzson, III. 5. 12; 11. 3.

Hrómundr Gripsson, I. 3. 1.

Hrómundr enn Halte Eyvindarson Soerkves, II. 30. 3-4: III. 5. 8; 5. 16.

Hrómundr Þóresson, of Þverárhlíð, II. 3.  1-2; 3. 4: III. 5. 1.

Hroerekr, f. of Fróðe, Gen. A. 1.

Hroerekr (al. Herrekr) Hildiríðarson, V. 4.  1.

Hroerekr  Sloengvand-bauge  Harallzson, V. 3. 1: [Hálfdanarson],
Gen. A. 1; B. 16.

Hrossbiaorn, f. of Ásbiaorn Myrkárskalle, Gen. A. 33.

Hrossbiaorn Raumsson, III. 5. 1: Gen. B. 5.

Hrosskell í Svartárdal, III. 7. 7.

Hrosskell Þórsteinsson of Hallkelsstadir, II. 2. 1-3: V. 17. 2.

Hrútr Herjolfsson, of Kambs-nes, II. 4. 15; 15. 10: V. 6. 2:
Gen. A. 35.

Hrútr Tannason, II. 4. 15.

Hugbertus, bishop of Canterbury, Cr. 3.1.

Húnboge Þórgilsson, II. 18. 1: Gen. B. 10.

Hunda-Steinarr, an English earl, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5: Mant. 5. 1.

*Hunde í Hundadal, II. 15. 5.

Hundolfr iarl, V. II. I: Mant. 5. 2 (Húnolfr).

Húngerðr Þóroddzdótter, I. 10. 3: IV. 17. 4.

Húnroeðr Véfroeðarson, III. 6. 3: p. 641. 43.

Húsvíkingar, IV. 9. 1.

Hvals-eyjar-firðingar, II. 12. 10.

Hvamm-Sturla, see Sturla Þórðarson.

Hvammverjar, Gen. A. 20.

Hvamm-Þórer, 1. 6. 7.

Hvate á Hvata-staoðom, III. 5. 2; 5. 5.

Hvítserkr Ragnarsson Loðbrókar, Mant. 5. 1.

Hyrningr Cleppiarnsson, II. 3. 7.

Hyrningr Óláfsson, Gen. B. 9; 11.

Hænsa-Þórer, see Hoensa-Þórer.

Hæringr Þórgrímsson Erro-beins, V. 12. 2; 12. 4.




I, J


Iarngerðr, Coðran's wife, Thorv. 1.

Iarngerðr Liótzsdótter, IV. 14. 4: p. 640. 43, 45.

Iarngerðr Þórarensdótter, II. 7. 1.

Iarngerðr Þórðardótter, pp. 639. 9; 941. 16.

Iathguðr Gillason, Gen. B. 15.

Iátmundr enn Helge (St. Eadmund, King of East Anglia), Gen. A. 32.

Iátvarðr, King of England, s. of Ælfred the Mighty, I. 1. 1.

Iðunn  Arnardótter, see Þórunn Arnardótter.

Iðunn Molda-Gnúpsdótter, I. 7. 1: IV. 17. 4.

Illoge Arason, of Reykjahólar, II. 11. 7; 19. 3: Gen. B. 12.

Illoge Biarnarson, priest, Io. 7. 1.

Illoge Eiðsson, I. 10. 7.

Illoge Fellz-goðe Eyvindarson Eikikróks, II. 5. 11 (= Þórðr Illoge).

Illoge, f. of Gísl the poet, Io. 4. 5.

Illoge, f. of Ingimundr the Priest, Mant. 1. 7.

Illoge Ingimundarson, Mant. 1. 7.

Illoge, s. of Iódís, II. 21. 1.

Illoge Leifsson, Hv. 5. 5.

Illoge enn Ramme Ásláksson, II. 11. 7; 12. 2.

Illoge enn Rauðe Hrólfsson, I. 7. 6; 11. 3; 17. 6: Cr. 1. 2.

Illoge enn Svarte Hallkelsson, I. 6. 4; 10. 2: II. 2. 1; 2. 4; 4. 15;
15. 3: III. 2. 3: Gen. B. 14: p. 641. 10.

Illoge Steinbiarnarson, II. 20. 9.

Illoge Þórbrannzson, II. 11. 6.

Illoge Þórðarson, II. 21. 1.

Illoge Þórvallzson, II. 7. 2.

Inge Gillason, King of Norway, Hv. 5. 13.

Inge Haraldsson, King of Norway, Pol. 13. 1.

Ingialldr Alfvarensson, II. 7. 3.

Ingialldr Brúnason, II. 23. 3.

Ingialldr Fróðason konungs, III. 13. 1: Gen. B. 12.

Ingialldr Grímsson, p. 640. 17.

Ingialldr Helgason, Norwegian king, II. 14. 1: Gen. A. 35-6: Th. 1. 4:
Lib. 306. 12.

Ingialldr Helgason ens Magra, II. 20. 8: III. 14. 1; 14. 4; 14. 10-11.

Ingialldr Hergilsson, II. 17. 4: III. 21. 3.

Ingialldr Haoscullzson at Keldom, Gen. A. 10.

Ingialldr Hróallzson, II. 5. 1: V. 11. 4.

Ingialldr Hrólfsson, III. 15. 10.

Ingialldr enn Illráðe, Lib. 306. 10.

Ingialldr, f. of Skegg-Avallde, III. 5. 16.

Ingialldr enn Sterke Geirfinnzson, Gen. A. 10.

Ingialldr enn Tryggve Kolbiarnarson Sneypis, III. 13. 2; 15. 2.

Ingialldr Þórgilsson, II. 4. 15.

Ingialldr Þórkelsson Hæyjartyrðils, Gen. A. 24.

Ingibiaorg Arnardótter, III. 20. 2.

Ingibiaorg Ásbiarnardótter, II. 2. 4; 15. 3: III. 2. 3.

Ingibiaorg Ástríðardótter, p. 642. 40.

Ingibiaorg Gilsdótter Skeiðar-nefs, II. 17. 5.

Ingibiaorg Hávarzdótter, V. 5. 1.

Ingibiaorg Hroðgeirsdótter, IV. 1. 3; 3. 1.

Ingibiaorg Rauðsdótter Ruggo, III. 9. 4.

Ingigerðr Philippusdótter, Gen. B. 10: p. 640. 9, 21.

Ingigerðr, w. of King Burizlaf, III. 9. 1.

Ingileif Ásbiarnardótter, IV. 5. 4: Cr. 8. 7.

Ingimundr Einarsson, Cr. 10. 8.

Ingimundr enn Gamle Þórsteinsson, III. 4. 1; 5. 1-3; 5. 9-12; 7. 1:
V. 17. 2; 17. 4: Gen. B. 5.

Ingimundr Grímsson, Gm. 611.

Ingimundr Hafrsson, Thorv. 6.

Ingimundr  Illogason, the priest, Mant. 1. 7.

Ingiríðr Ceartansdótter, III. 6. 4.

Ingiríðr Þórvallzdótter, p. 642. 40.

Ingolfr Arnarson, I. 3. 1-10; 4. 3-4; 5. 1; 6. 8; 8. 1: II. 12. 7:
V. 15. 2; 16. 9; 16. 11-12; 17. 2; 17. 4: Gen. B. 10: Th. 3. 3:
Lib. 1. 2; 3. 1;  10. 12.

Ingolfr enn Fagre Þórsteinsson, III. 5. 13.

Ingolfr Herroeðarson, II. 28. 4-5.

Ingolfr enn Sterke Anason á Holmsláttre, II. 12. 4; 13. 1.

Ingolfr enn Sterke Þórolfsson Sparrar, II. 21. 4.

Inguðr Þórsteinsdótter, II. 6. 5.

Ingunn Helgadótter ens Magra, III. 14. 1; 15. 9: Gen. A. 25.

Ingunn, w. of Ketill Hoengr, V. 4. 2.

Ingunn Þóresdótter, Gen. A. 25.

Ingunn Þórolfsdótter Véleifssonar, II. 15. 8: III. 21. 3.

Ioan, see also Jón.

Ioan, archbishop of Trondhjem, Hv. 5. 13: Ch. 637.

Ioan Arnason, Gen. B. 13.

Ioan, bishop of Greenland, Mant. 6. 1: Pol. 7. 1.

Ioan Gizorarson, Hv. 2. 19.

Ioan enn Írske, bishop, Lib. 8. 1: Hv. 1. 11 (enn Saxneske):
Mant. 6. 1-2.

Ioan Ketilsson, Pol. 10. 1.

Ioan Loftzson, Gen. B. 15: Hv. 5. 9: Þorl. 7. 4: Pol. 1. 1; 2. 3;
4. 3; 6.  1; 14. 7; 15. 2: Od. 2. 1; 6. 1.   (See also Jón.)

Ioan  Ogmundarson enn Helge, I. 5. 1: IV. 14. 4: V. 3. 2; 9. 10;
11. 6: Gen. B. 10;  15: Mant. 1. 5-6: Lib. 9. 1; 10. 11; 305. 13:
Cr. 10. 2; 10. 7: Hv. 1. 7b; 2. 9; 3. 5; 3. 13: Pol. 15. 2: Io. 1. 1;
3. 2; 6. 3: pp. 592, 596: Gm. 613.

Ioan Sigmundarson, Hv. 5. 13: Gm. 606.

Ioan Þórgeirsson, I. 7. 4.

Ioan Þórvarðzson, priest, Cr. 10. 8.

Iódís Illogadótter ens Ramma, II. 11. 7.

Iódís Oddzdótter, pp. 641. 1, 7; 642. 37, 42.

Iódís Snartardótter, II. 18. 1: Gen. B. 9 (Védís).

Iódís Þórarensdótter, II. 21. 1.

Iófríðr Bárðardótter, I. 7. 5.

Iófríðr Gunnarsdótter, I. 10. 3: II. 15. 14: IV. 17. 4: Lib. 5. 1.

Iófríðr Tungu-Oddzdótter, I. 10. 3: II. 5. 4.

Johannes VIII, Pope in Rome, I. 1. 1.

Iaokull Bárðarson, III. 5. 13.

Iaokull Ingimundarson ens Gamla, III. 5. 3; 5. 12-13: pp. 319. 14;
322. 18; 323. 1.

Iaokull Ingimundarson iarls, III.  5. 1; 5. 13.

Iólgeirr á Iólgeirs-staoðom, V. 4. 3; 9. 8-9.

Jón, see also Ioan.

Jón í Áse, Sigurðarson, p. 640. 13.

Jón, f. of Helga, V. 16. 2.

Jón klerkr, Ch. 638.

Jón Korpr Rafnsson, p. 639. 3.

Jón Loptzson,  II. 22. 6:  V. 11. 6: p. 640. 12.

Jón Petrsson, p. 639. 4.

Jon á Reyrvelle, s. of Ulfr Stallare, II. 9. 3.

Jón Svarte, p. 593.

Ióra Harradótter, III. 4. 2.

Ióra Helgadótter, II. 21. 1.

Ióreiðr, m. of Are enn Fróðe, IV. 14. 4n.

Ióreiðr Hallzdótter, Gen. B. 10.

Ióreiðr Olvesdótter, II. 2. 1.

Ióreiðr Tinnzdótter, II. 6. 4.

Ióreiðr Þiðrandadótter,  IV. 12. 2; 14. 4: Gen. A. 19; B. 15.

Iaorundr, Lib. 306. 7.

Iaorundr, archbishop, Ch. 638.

Iaorundr Ásgeirsson Cneifar, V. 3. 2.

Iaorundr Atlason, II. 12. 1; 19. 5; 20. 2; 23. 2.

Iaorundr enn Cristne Cetilsson, I. 7. 3: V. 17. 5.

Iaorundr Goðe Hrafnsson ens Heimska, V. 3. 1; 4. 7; 6. 1-2; 17. 4:
Gen. I: Cr. 6. 1.

Iaorundr Háls Þóresson Þegjanda, III. 5. 2; 5. 3; 6. 6.

Iaorundr af Hitárnese, Ch. 631.

Iaorundr Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

Iaorundr frá Keldom, IV. 3. 1.

Iaorundr í  Miðenge, Þórgilsson Grímssonar, II. 21. 1: V. 15. 1.

Iaorundr í Skora-dal, II. 11. 7.

Iaorundr, f. of Skúle, II. 7. 2.

Iaorundr, b. of Sleito-Helge, II. 30. 4.

Iaorundr Ulfsson ens Skiálga, II. 19. 4.

Iaorundr Þórfinnzson, Gen. B. 13.

Iaorundr Þórgilsson Collssonar, II. 20. 2.

Iórunn Einarsdótter of Stafaholt, II. 7. 2.

Iórunn Einarsdótter Halldórssonar, III. 14. 19: IV. 14. 4: Gen. B. 10
(Ióreiðr); 15.

Iórunn, step-daughter of Gnúpr Molda-Gnúpsson, IV. 17. 4.

Iórunn Helgadótter, wife of Tungo-Oddr, I. 10. 3.

Iórunn Helgodótter, m. of Haukr Erlendsson, p. 639. 14.

Iórunn Hialtadótter Skeggjasonar, V. 9. 6.

Iórunn Ingimundardótter ens Gamla, III. 4. 1; 5. 3: Gen B. 5.

Iórunn Mannvitz-brecka Ketilsdótter Flatnefs, IV. 16. 1: Th. 1. 1.

Iórunn en Óborna Ósvallzdótter, Gen. A.  32.

Iórunn Olvesdótter Barnakarls, V. 13. 4.

Iórunn Svertingsdótter, V. 9. 8.

Iórunn Teitzdótter Ketilbiarnarsonar, Gen. A. 13.

Iórunn Þórgnýsdótter Laogmannz, III. 16. 1.

Iórunn Þórmóðardótter, I. 11. 3.

Iórunn Þórsteinsdótter Tiald-stoeðings, V. 8. 6.

Iórunn Þórvallzdótter Holbarka, III. 11. 2.

Iósteinn Þórgeirsson, I. 7. 8.

Iósteinn Þórsteinsson Tiald-stoeðings, V. 8. 6.

Iotun-biaorn, III. 5. 1: Gen. B. 5.

Ísfirðingar, II. 26. 1.

Ísgerðr Goðbrannzdótter Kúlo, Gen. B. 5.

Ísgerðr Hunda-Steinarsdótter, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5.

Ísgerðr Þórmóðsdótter, I. 6. 4.

Ísgerðr Þórsteinsdótter, II. 21. 1.

Ísleifr Gizorarson, bishop of Iceland, V. 14. 5: Gen. A. 14; B. 4. 15:
Mant. 3. 2; 5. 1: Lib. pr. 2; 1. 1; 9. 1; 10. 1: Cr. 10. 1-3: Hv. 1. 2,
etc.: Io. 1. 2; 3. 1, etc.; 6. 1: p. 595.

Ísleifr Grímsson, p. 593.

Ísleifr Hallzson, p. 593.

Ísleifr of Ísleifsstaðir, II. 3. 3.

Ísleifr Ísroeðarson, III. 6. 4.

Ísolfr Biólfsson, IV. 10. 1.

Ísolfr at Búlande, IV. 18. 3.

Ísroeðr Holltason, III. 6. 4.

Ísroeðr Hróallzson, IV. 2. 3.

Ísroeðr of Ísroeðarstaðir, II. 3. 3.

Ísroeðr á Ketils-staoðom, IV. 5. 4.

Ívarr enn Beinlause Ragnarsson Loð­brókar, Mant. 5. 1: Lib. 1. 1.

Ívarr Beytill, II. 29. 1: Gen. B. 5.

Ívarr Jónsson, Gm. 612.

Ívarr Raognvallzson Mæra-iarls, IV. 14. 1.

Ívarr Upplendinga-iarl Hálfdanarson ens Gamla, IV. 14. 1.

Ívarr Víðfaðme Hálfdanarson, Gen. A. 1.

Ívarr Þórðarson, Mant. 1. 7.




K


Kálfr Ásgeirsson Æðe-kollz, II. 29. 1: Gen. B. 4-5: Cr. 6. 3.

Kálfr skáld Mánason, III. 6. 5.

Kálfr Snorrason, Pol. 15. 2.

Kálfr (Kolfiðr) af Sólheimom, Gen. B. 13.

Kálfr, f. of Snorre, Gen. B. 15.

Káre, abbot, Þorl. 15. 2.

Káre Solmundarson, Nj. 364. 9.

Káre enn Svarte, Mant. 5. 4.

Káre tulkare, Gen. B. 5.

Karl under Karlsfelle, II. 3. 12.

Karl enn Rauðe Þórsteinsson, III. 14. 5-6.

Karl (Steinrauðarson) á Upsastraond, III. 14. 7.

Karle Conalsson, II. 1. 2.

Katla, w. of Þórsteinn Solmundarson, II. 21. 1.

Katla, m. of Þórgrímr and Þórbiaorg Colbrún, II. 20. 8.

Kétilbiaorn enn Gamle Ketilson, I. 4. 3: II. 26. 3: III. 8. 1: V. 7. 2;
12. 2; 13. 6; 14. 1-5; 14. 7-8; 15. 2; 17. 2: Gen. A. 13-15; B. 7:
Mant. 5. 1: Lib. 2. 1; 305. 8: Hv. 1. 1.

Ketilbiaorn Teitzson, V. 14. 5.

Ketill enn Auðge Ásbiarnarson, V. 3. 6.

Ketill Aurriðe, V. 7. 10; 9. 4.

Ketill Bifra Horða-Kárason, I. 3. 1.

Ketill Brimill Ornolfsson, III. 16. 1: Gen. A. 31; 34.

Ketill Brúnason ens Hvíta, III. 12. 4.

Ketill enn Einhende Auðunnarson Þunn-kárs, II. 15. 14: V. 9. 2-7;
13. 1: Gen. B. 7.

Ketill enn Fíflske, IV.  16. 1; 16. 3; 16.5: V. 17. 2; 17. 5:
Gen. A. 23: Cr. 4. 3.

Ketill Fiorleifarson, see Ketill Þóresson Leðr-hálss.

Ketill Flatnefr Biarnarson Buno, I. 4. 1; 3-5; 5. 1: II. 9. 1.; 14. 1:
III. 13. 3: IV.  16. 1: Gen. A. 32; 35; B. 3; 10: Th. 1. 1-4; 2. 1-2;
3. 2; 5. 1: Mant. 5. 5: Lib. 2. 1: Thorv. 7.

Ketill Gizorarson, Hv. 1. 1.

Ketill Goðmundarson, Cr. 10. 8.

Ketill Gunnarsson, III. 15. 7: Gen. B. 16.

Ketill Hello-flage, III. 6. 1: V. 11. 1.

Ketill Hermundarson, abbot, Gen. B. 14: Pol. 11. 2.

Ketill Hoengr or Hrafnisto Hallbiarnarson, V. 4. 1: Gen. A. 31; 34.

Ketill Hoengr Þórkelsson, V. 4. 1-7; 5. 1; 6. 2-3; 7. 1; 7. 3-4;
9. 12; 17. 2; 17. 4: Gen. A. 5; 18: Lib. 3. 4.

Ketill Haorða-Káre, see Haorða-Káre.

Ketill Haorzke Þórsteinsson Hofða, III. 19. 1-4.

Ketill Ilbreiðr Þórbiarnarson Talcna, II. 17. 4; 18. 6; 21. 6.

Ketill Illogason ens Svarta, III. 2. 3.

Ketill Kappe Þórbiarnarson, II. 7. 5-6.

Ketill, f. of Ketilbiaorn enn Gamle, V. 14. 1: Gen. B. 7.

Ketill Ketilbiarnarson, V. 14. 3.

Ketill í Ketilsfirðe, II. 12. 9.

Ketill Kiólfare, I. 8. 1: V. 16. 4.

Ketill Mánason, III. 20. 3.

Ketill at Meðalfelle, IV. 14. 5.

Ketill Móðolfsson, IV. 7. 3; 15. 6.

Ketill Pólsson, Pol. 1. 8; 9. 2; 10. 1.

Ketill Raumr Ormsson, III. 5. 1: Gen. B. 5 (Þrumr).

Ketill Refr Skíðason, Gen. A. 32: Cr. 1. 1.

Ketill enn Slétt-mále, Gen. A. 12.

Ketill Smiðjo-drumbr, II. 11. 7.

Ketill Veðr, herser of Hringa-ríke, I. 4. 5: II. 9. 1: III. 13. 3:
Th. 1. 1.

Ketill Þiðrandason (Ketill Þrymr, the younger), IV. 4. 2; 8. 1:
Gen. A. 19; 27.

Ketill Þistill, II. 6. 1: III. 22. 2; 22. 6.

Ketill, f. of Þórer Ketilsson, IV. 7. 3.

Ketill Þóresson Leðr-hálss, III. 17. 2; 18. 2.

Ketill Þóresson Snepils, Gen. A. 31.

Ketill Þórkelsson, Gen. B. 10.

Ketill Þórláksson, Ch. 636: pp. 641. 3, etc.; 642. 8, etc.

Ketill Þórleifsson, Pol. 6. 3.

Ketill Þórleiksson, p. 639. 6.

Ketill byscop Þórsteinsson, Gen. A. 32; B. 14: Mant. 1. 6; 4. 2:
Lib. pr. 1; 306. 2: Cr. 10. 8; 10. 10: Hv. 2. 13; 3. 5-6; 4. 8; 5. 2:
Þorl. 14. 3: Io. 12. 5: pp. 598-601.

Ketill Þórvallzson Króks, III. 14. 10.

Ketill Þrymr Þóresson Þiðranda, IV. 4. 1-2: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 19; 27.

Kiotve enn Auðge, II. 17. 3: V. 16. 4.

Kirjalax, Byzantine emperor, Cr. 10. 9.

Klaufe Hafþórsson, III. 14. 5-6.

Klaufe Þórvallzson, Cr. 2. 3.

Kleppr (al.  Klyppr) Snorrason Goða, Gen. B. 13.

Kloeingr Grímkelsson, II. 7. 2.

Kloeingr Snæbiarnarson, I. 7. 2.

Kloengr Þórsteinsson, bishop of Scalholt, Hv. 2. 19; 5. 1, etc.:
Þorl. 6. 1; 6. 4; 7. 2, etc.;  14. 3: Io. 11. 5:  12. 5: pp. 573, 633.

Kloengr Þórvallzson, Pol. 13. 4.

Klyppr herser Þórðarson, Gen. B. 15-16.

Knaottr Starrason, I. 1. 2.

Knaottr Þióðreksson, II. 15. 96; 18. 2: Gen. B. 2.

Knútr Eiríksson, King of Sweden, Hv. 2. 20.

Knútr Valdemarsson, King of Denmark, Pol. 3. 4;  15. 2.

Kolbeinn, see Colbeinn.

Kolbiaorn Sneyper, III. 13. 2.

Kolfiðr af Sólheimom, see Kálfr.

Kolfinna Hallzdótter, III. 7. 4: Gen. B. 11.

Kolfinna Illogadótter ens Svarta, II. 4. 15.

Kolfinna Oddbiarnardótter, V. 41. 3.

Kolfinna Skegg-Ávalldadótter, III. 5. 16.

Kolgreflingar, II. 8. 2.

Kollr, Kolr, see Collr, Colr.

Kollsveinn Eyvindarson Hialta, I. 5. 1.

Kolskeggr enn  Fróðe Ásbiarnarson, IV. 5. 4; 8. 3; 14. 4: V. 17. 1.

Kolskeggr Hámundarson, Gen. A. 5.

Krákneflingar, II. 21. 1.

Kristophorus, Herra, p. 640. 8, 22.

Kraoko-Hreiðarr Ófeigsson Lafskeggs, III. 8. 2-3.

Kropps-menn, I. 10. 2.

Kromu-Oddr, I. 10. 4.

Kvelld-Ulfr Brunda-Bialfason, I. 8. 1: II. 4. 1: V. 4. 1; 5. 2.

Kvistlingar, V. 11. 5.

Kygri-Bjaorn, Gm. 609.




L


Lágeyingar, IV. 18. 4.

Lambe Sigmundarson (or rather Sigvatzson ens Rauða, cf. Pedigree,
p. 238), V. 5. 2: Gen. 7.

Lambe enn Sterke Þórðarson, II. 4. 12; 5. 20.

Lambertus, bishop, Hv. 3. 12.

Lambkárr Þórgilsson, Gm. 607, 609.

Langaholts-Þóra, II. 5. 9-10.

Langdoeler, II. 11. 7.

Laufæsingar, pp. 329, 368.

Laugarbrecko-Einarr Sigmundarson, II. 6. 1-5; 15. 4: III. 22. 5.

Leggr, priest, Pol. 11. 2.

Leiðolfr á Leiðolfs-staoðom, V. II. 2; 12. 2.

Leiðolfr Kappe í Skógahverfe, IV. 7. 2; 18. 1: V. 17. 2.

Leifr enn Heppne Eiríksson Rauða, II. 12. 8; 19. 4: Cr. 8. 1.

Leifr Hroðmarsson, see Hiaorleifr Hroðmarsson.

Leifr Loðhattarson, II. 17. 2: Mant. 274, 276.

Lemmarus, see Liemarus.

Leo (VI), Byzantine emperor, I. 1. 1.

Leo (IX), Pope, Lib. 9. 8: Hv. 1. 3: Io. 1. 2.

Liemarus, archbishop of Hamburg, Hv. 2. 4: Io. 6. 1.

Liný, d. of Þórleif Þórðardótter, II. 22. 6.

Liósvetningar, p. 328.

Lióðar-keptr, V. 4. 6.

Liót Einarsdótter, III. 22. 1.

Liót, m. of Hrolleifr, III. 5. 12.

*Liót á Liótar-staoðom, V. 7. 3.

Liótólfr Goðe Alreksson í Svarfaðardal, III. 12. 1; 12. 4: IV. 1. 4.

Liótólfr á Liótólfs-staoðom, II. 16. 2.

Liótr, cousin of Hrolleifr, III. 5. 12.

Liótr Laongo-bak, V. 12. 4.

Liótr Óþveginn, III. 20. 4.

Liótr Síðo-Hallzson, Gen. A. 19; B. 10; 15.

Liótr enn Spake Þórgrímsson Harðrefssonar, II. 23. 2; 24. 2.

Liótr, s. of Yngvildr, IV. 14. 4.

Liótr Þórbiarnarson of Veggir, II. 3. 3.

Liótunn, sister of Colgrímr enn Gamle, I. 9. 1.

Liúfa, w. of Biaorn í Biarnarfirðe, II. 29. 2.

Liuvina, d. of the King of the Bearms, II. 17. 2.

Loðhaottr Þræll, II. 17. 2: Mant. 274.

Loðinn Ongull, III. 16. 5.

Loðmundr enn Gamle, IV. 9. 2-5; 10. 1; 16. 1; 18. 8; 19. 1-4.

Loðmundr, f. of Grímr, II. 23. 2.

Loðmundr Skeggjason, IV. 16. 1.

Loðmundr Svartzson í Odda, V. 8. 7: Gen. A. 1: p. 640. 11.

Lofthoena Arenbiarnardótter, II. 2. 1.

Lofthoena Erpsdótter, II. 2. 1.

Loftr Byscopsson (s. of Bishop Árni), IV. 5. 2.

Loftr, s. of Freygerðr, V. 16. 10.

Loftr enn Gamle Ormsson Fróðasonar (al. Fróðason), I. 3. 10: II. 5. 8:
V. 9. 2; 10. 1-2; 10. 4-6.

Loftr Pólsson, Pol. 1. 8; 9. 2; 10. 1; 13. 1.

Loftr Sæmundarson í Odda, II. 22. 6: V. 11. 6: Gen. A. 1; B. 15:
Pol. 1. 1: p. 640. 12.

Lón-Einarr, II. 6. 1-2; 6. 5.

Lýtingr Arnbiarnarson, II. 3. 7: IV. 3. 1-2; 8. 2: Gen. A. 28.

Lækny (al. Lecny), concubine of Þógeirr Liósvetningagoðe, III. 18. 1.




M


Mabil Hallgeirsdótter, V. 4. 7; 7. 3.

Macan, Þorl. 8. 4.

Maddaðr (al. Beadmacr), King of the Irish, II. 8. 3.

Magnús Berbeinn (or Berfoettr) Óláfsson, King of Norway, I.  4.
5:   Lib.  10. 12: Hv. 2. 20: Pol. 1. 1: Io. 4. 5.

Magnús, Earl of Orkney, Hv. 2. 20.

Magnús Einarsson, bishop, IV.  14. 4: Gen. B. 10: Hv. 4. 1 ff.:
Þorl. 3. 3; 4. 1; 14. 3.

Magnús Erlingsson, King of Norway, Þorl. 8. 1; 15. 1.

Magnús Gizorarson, bishop, IV. 14. 4: V. 15. 2: Gen. B. 15: Pol. 6. 3;
7. 2; 14. 2: Gm. 608, 611: Ch. 635.

Magnús Goðe Goðmundarson, II. 22. 6: Ch. 635.

Magnús enn Góðe Ólátsson, King of Norway, Gen. B. 14: Hv. 1. 11-12.

Magnús Goðmundarson, priest, II. 23. 2.

Magnús Harallzson, King of Norway, Hv. 1. 12.

Magnús Sigurðarson, King of Norway, Hv. 4. 3; 4. 11-12: Þorl. 1. 1.

Magnús Vilborgarson, pp. 641. 2,8; 642. 38, 43.

Magnús Þórðarson, II. 17. 6: Cr. 10. 8: Hv. 4. 1: Od. 4. 3: pp. 639. 1:
640. 28.

Magnús Þórláksson, Ch. 635.

Magnús Þórsteinsson, Hv. 4. 1.

Magnús Þórsteinsson Síðo-Hallzsonar IV. 14. 4: Gen. B. 10.

Mág-Snorre, II. 23. 2.

Mána-Liótr (Liótr Mánason), II. 7. 2: Gen. B. 13.

Máne enn Kristne, Thorv. 7.

Máne at Mána-felle, III. 20. 3.

Máne Snorrason Goða, Gen. B. 13.

Máne Þórbrannzson, III. 6. 5.

Markús Skeggjason, Laogsaogomaðr, V. 7. 9: Lib. 10. 2; 10. 3:
Cr. 10. 3; 10.  4: Hv. 2. 7; 2. 20: Io. 6. 1-2: p. 640. 48.

Markús Þórðarson á Melum, Od. 4. 1: Ch. 635: pp. 640. 49; 641. 6, etc.

Margret en Haga, Pol. 13. 3.

Margret Haoscullzdótter lækniss, II. 23. 2.

Márr Ánarson, II. 8. 5.

Márr Ásmundarson, II. 21. 1.

Márr Atlason ens Rauða, á Reykjahólom, II.  15. 11; 17.  4; 19. 1-3;
19. 5: Gen. A. 38; B. 12 (Ulfsson), 13.

Márr Brondolfsson or Runolfsson, Gen. A. 15.

Márr Hallvarðzson, II. 15. 14: Th. 11. 4.

Márr Hamalsson, I. 3. 10.

Márr Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

Márr Húnroeðarson (f. of Hafliðe), II. 23. 2: III. 6. 3: Gen. B. 13:
Mant. 1. 3; 1. 6-7.

Márr Illogason, II. 11. 7; 15. 11.

Márr Iaorundarson Hals, III. 5. 4; 5. 16.

Márr Naddodzson, II. 6. 2: V. 13. 4-5.

Márr Runolfsson, see Márr Brondolfsson.

Márr, f. of Steinolfr (= Márr Víga-Glúmsson?), III. 19. 4.

Melcorca, d. of Myrceartan, King of the Irish, II. 15. 9.

Meldun, a Scottish earl, II. 14. 4; 15. 7.

Mel-menn, pp. 329, 368.

*Mel-patrekr [Mael-Patraic], f. of Steinroeðr, V. 16. 2.

Miðfiarðar-Skegge Skinna-Biarnarson, I. 10. 7: II. 2. 4;  15. 3;
15. 14; 30. 4: III. 2. 1-3: V. 3. 4; 17. 4: Gen. A. 37.

Miaoll, d. of Án Bogsveiger, III. 5. 1: Gen. B. 5.

Móðolfr Smiðr Eyvindarson Karpa, IV. 7. 3; 15. 6; 18. 1-2: Gen. A. 4
(Móðolfr Spake); 10 (id.); 25 (id.).

Móðolfssyner, IV. 18. 2.

Móðylfingar, Gen. A. 4.

Móeiðr Hildesdótter, V. 4. 5; 7. 3.

Molda-Gnúpr Hrólfsson, IV. 17. 1-4: V. 9. 8; 16. 8: Hv. 4. 1.

Molda-Gnúpssyner, V. 16. 8.

Maorðr Ásmundarson, IV. 3. 8.

Maorðr Gígja (Sigmundarson, or rather Sigvatzson ens Rauða), V. 5. 2.;
6. 2; 7. 2; 17. 4: Gen. A. 3 (see Pedigree and note, p. 238).

Maorðr Órækja, IV. 18. 6.

Mórr, see Márr Naddodzson.

Mosfellingar, Lib. 2. 1.

Mottull, king, II. 2. 1.

Músa-Baolverkr Þórarensson, I. 11. 3; II. 2. 1.

Mýra-Cniúcr Þórvallzson, II. 20. 8; 23. 2.

Mýra-menn, IV. 14. 9.

Myrceartan, King of the Irish, II. 15. 9.

Myrgiol, d. of Gliomal, King of the Irish, II. 14. 4.

Myruna Beadmacs (al. Maddaðar) dótter Íra konungs, II. 8. 3.

Mæfa Þórvarðardótter, II. 3. 4.




N


Naddoðr, I. 2. 2: II. 6. 2: V. 13. 4-5: Gen. A. 15.

Nafar-Helge, III. 12. 1-2.

Nagle, a follower of Þórarenn Svarte, II. 7. 5.

Narfe, Cr. 6. 2.

Narfe Arnarson, III. 14. 10.

Narfe or Brecko, Gm. 612.

Narfe Einarsson, I. 7. 3.

Narfe, son of Guðrún, IV. 16. 1.

Narfe Snorrason, Gen. B. 9-10.

Narfe Þórmóðarson, III. 12. 7.

Náttfare í Náttfaravík, I. 2. 1-2: III. 19. 2.

Nefsteinn Gnúpa-Bárðarson, IV. 15. 5.

Nereiðr iarl enn Sínke (al. Gamle), V. 16. 4.

Nesja-Cniúcr Þórolfsson Sparrar, II. 20. 8-9; 21. 4; 23. 2.

Nes-menn, IV. 10. 2.

Niall byscop, Pol. 15. 2.

Niall Herlaugsson, V. 16. 9.

Niall Sigmundarson í Skógom, V. 2. 2.

Niall Þórgeirsson (Brenno-Niall), V. 3. 5: Gen. 8-11: Nj. 364-8.

Nicholas (Bergþórsson), abbot, Hv. 5. 7.

Nicholas, bishop of Mirrea, Hv. 2. 20.

Nicholas, bishop of Osló, Pol. 13. 2.

Nicholas Sigurðarson, Hv. 5. 13.

Niðbiaorg, d. of King Beolan, II. 9. 3: Gen. B. 3.

Niaorðr, King of the Swedes, Lib. 306. 4.

Nórr, mythical king, IV. 12. 1.




O


Óblauðr Otryggsson, II. 17. 1; 20. 3; 27. 1: Gen. A. 30
(Hiaorleifsson); B. 12 (id.).

Odda-verjar, III. 6. 4: V. 6. 2: Gen. A. 1; 32.

Oddbiaorg Grímsdótter, II. 23. 2.

Oddbiaorn Aska-smiðr, V. 4. 3; 4. 7.

Odde Ásolfsson í Haofða, IV. 2. 3: p. 642. 10.

Odde Cetilsson Gufu, see Odde Yrarson.

Odde Grímson, p. 601.

Odde Snerisson, Gen. B. 9; 11: Mant. 1. 3; 1. 6.

Odde, f. of Þórhallr Goðe í Diúpafirðe, II. 15. 9 b.

Odde (al. Oddr) Yrarson, I. 11. 4: II. 15. 9 b; 17. 6; 20. 2; 20. 6:
Gen. B. 2 (Gen. B. 8 Brodde Þóroddzson?).

Odde Þórgerðarson, p. 641. 31.

Oddfríðr Helgadótter, II. 7. 2.

*Oddgeirr of Oddgeirshólar, I. 7. 12: V. 11. 5.

Oddkatla Iaorundardótter, II. 19. 5; 20. 2.

Oddkatla, d. of (al. wife of) Ófeigr Þórólfsson Fasthalda, II. 26. 6.

Oddkatla Þórðardótter, II. 23. 2.

Oddkatla Þórvallzdótter, II. 8. 1.

Oddkell Stórolfsson, V. 4. 4.

Oddlaug Eyvindardótter, IV. 19. 1.

Oddlaug Vébrannzdótter, V. 13. 6.

Oddleif Ketilbiarnardótter, V. 14. 3.

Oddleifr Geirleifsson, II. 21. 1; 21. 4: V. 15. 1: Th. 7. 3.

Oddleifr Stafr Flókason, III. 11. 5.

Oddleifr Þórðarson Kráko-nefs, II. 23. 2: Gen. B. 10.

Oddmar Þórunnarson, II. 16. 2.

Oddný Brodd-Helgadótter, Gen. A. 29.

Oddný Magnúsdótter, Hv. 4. 1.

Oddný (al. Ásborg) Oddzdótter ens Mióva, V. 7. 5; 9. 4.

Oddný Þórbiarnardótter ens Gaulverska, V. 10. 1.

Oddný Þórhallzdótter, p. 641. 19, 38.

Oddr á Alfta-nese, II. 4. 13.

Oddr Arngeirsson, III. 22. 3-4.

Oddr Ásolfsson, II. 15. 13.

Oddr Bitro-Oddason, II. 29. 3.

Oddr Breiðfirðingr, III. 10. 2.

Oddr Draflason, II. 11. 7.

Oddr Hallkelsson of Kiðjaberg, I. 10. 3: II. 26. 2-3: V. 15. 2.

Oddr Hallvarðzson, V. 12. 3.

Oddr, father of Hrafn Hlymreks-fare, II. 18. 1.

Oddr á Iaorva, II. 12. 1.

Oddr Kaldmunnr, V. 3. 7.

Oddr enn Mióve Helgason Hrogns, V. 7. 5; 7. 9; 9. 4.

Oddr munkr Há-Snorrason, II. 29. 3: III. 1. 2.

Oddr Ófeigsson, Nj. 368. 26.

Oddr Onundarson, see Tungo-Oddr.

Oddr Ormsson, III. 4. 2.

Oddr enn Racke Þórviðarson, II. 5. 6: Th. 7. 3.

Oddr Skraute, II. 17. 5.

Oddr Sveinbiarnarson, II. 4. 13.

Oddr Unason, III. 5. 12; 11. 3.

Oddr Yrarson, see Odde Yrarson.

Oddr, f. of Þórgrímr, II. 7. 3.

Oddr Þórgrímsson í Axlar-haga, III. 8. 4.

Oddr Þórormsson, III. 4. 1.

Oðr, see Auðr.

Ófeigr Burlo-fótr Ívarsson, II. 29. 1: Gen. B. 5 (Óleifr Bullo-fótr).

Ófeigr Gretter Einarsson (al. Oleifsson Breiðs Einarssonar), V. 4. 5;
4. 7; 13. 1-2: Mant. 5. 5.

Ófeigr Herroeðarson, II. 28. 4.

Ófeigr Lafskegg Yxna-Þóresson, III. 8. 2.

Ófeigr Loðmundarson, IV. 19. 4.

Ófeigr í Raumsdal, I. 10. 7: V. 3. 4: Gen. A. 8 (Þórolfr).

Ófeigr Þórarensson, III. 12. 1.

Ófeigr Þórolfsson Fasthalda, II. 17. 6; 26. 6.

Ófeigr Þunnskeggr Kráko-Hreiðarsson, III. 8. 3.

Ogmundr Haorða-Kárason, Gen. B. 15-16.

Ogmundr Kálfsson, abbot of Helgafell, Þorl. 7. 2; 15. 2.

Ogmundr Vaolo-Steinsson, II. 18. 3; 24. 2; 24. 5.

Ogmundr Þórkelsson, I. 5. 1: V. 3. 2: Io. 1. 1: ? Ch. 631.

Ogmundr Þórvarðzson, Gm. 607.

Óláfr Beckr Karlsson, III. 12. 6-7.

Óláfr Belgr, II. 7. 4-5; 18. 3.

Óláfr, bishop of Greenland, Mant. 6. 1.

Óláfr enn Digre (= Ó. enn Helge), Lib. 1. 4; 8. 4.

Óláfr at Draongom, II. 26. 4.

Óláfr Egilsson ens Rauða, IV. 10. 3.

Óláfr, f. of Goðmundr the priest, Gen. B. 10.

Óláfr Goðroeðarson, Lib. 306. 12.

Óláfr Harallzsonar ens Hárfagra, Lib. 7. 1.

Óláfr at Haukagil, Cr. 2. 1: Thorv. 5.

Óláfr Hávarðarson Halta, II. 24. 8; 26. 1.

Óláfr, king in the Hebrides, Gm. 615.

Óláfr, canon at Helgafell, Ch. 633.

Óláfr Helgason, II. 23. 2.

Óláfr enn Helge Harallzson, King of Norway, II. 29. 1: III. 4. 1;
5. 13: Gen. B. 5: Mant. 5. 1: Hv. 1. 11-12: Io. 1. 1; 2. 2.

Óláfr Herjolfsson Hornabriótz, V. 2. 1.

Óláfr, f. of Hyrningr, Gen. B. 9.

Óláfr Iafna-collr, II. 22. 5; 26. 5.

Óláfr enn Kyrre Harallzson, King of Norway, Lib. 10. 1; 10. 12:
Cr. 10. 3: Hv. 1. 11; 2. 14; 2. 20: Io. 4. 5; 6. 1.

Óláfr Magnússon, King of Norway, Hv. 2. 20: Io. 14. 3.

Óláfr enn Soenski Eiríksson, Lib. 7. 9.

Óláfr Trételgja, Lib. pr. 2; 306. 10.

Óláfr Tryggvason, King of Norway, II. 30. 4: III. 20. 2: V. 7. 2:
Gen. B. 5-7: Mant. 2. 2; 5. 1: Lib. 7. 1; 7. 9; 8. 4; 9. 8; 10. 12:
Cr. 3. 2, &c.: Thorv. 7: Io. 6. 1.

Óláfr Tvennum-brúne, V. 12. 3-4.

Óláfr Vaolo-briótr Ásgeirsson, III. 14. 6.

Óláfr Þórarensson, V. 16. 12.

Óláfr, see also Óleifr.

Óleifr Baoðmóðsson, IV. 16. 2.

Óleifr Breiðr Einarsson, V. 13. 1: Gen. A. 16: Mant. 5. 5.

Óleifr Bullo-fótr, see Ófeigr Burlo-fótr.

Óleifr Cvaran, I. 8. 3.

Óleifr Feilan Þórsteinsson Rauðs, II. 10. 5; 14. 1; 15. 14: V. 13. 1:
Gen. A. 36-37; B. 1: Th. 9. 1: Lib. 5. 1; 305. 16; 306. 14.

Óleifr Goðroeðarson, king, II. 14. 1.

Óleifr Hialte, I. 9. 4: Gen. A. 18: Lib. 3. 5.

Óleifr enn Hvíte Ingiallzson, King of Dublin, II. 14. 1: Gen. A. 35-36;
B. 12: Th. 1. 4: Lib. 306. 13.

Óleifr enn Hvíte Skæringsson, V. 3. 2.

Óleifr Langhals Biarnarson, II. 3. 7; 8. 2.

Óleifr Páe Haoscullzson, II. 9. 3; 15. 9; 29. 1: Gen. A. 35 (Óláfr);
B. 5 (id.), 13 (id.): Cr. 1. 2.

Óleifr, see also Óláfr.

Óli (al. Áli) Svarthaofðason, p. 639. 12.

Olmoeðlingar, IV. 10. 8.

Olmóðr enn Gamle Haorða-Kárason, I. 3. 2: Gen. B. 15-16.

Olmóðr Vémundarson, IV. 10. 8.

Ólof, see Álof.

Olver Barnakarl Einarsson, I. 2. 2: II. 9. 4; 15. 14; 17. 3:
III. 14. 4: V. 13. 1: 13. 4; 16. 3: Gen. A. 16: Mant. 5. 5.

Olver Eysteinsson, IV. 18. 3; 18. 6.

Olver Finnason, II. 2. 1.

Olver Hásteinsson, V. 11. 2.

Olver enn Hvíte Ósvallzson (al. Olvesson), IV. 3. 1: Gen. A. 28:
Mant. 5. 6.

Olver Muðr Vilbaldsson, IV. 17. 5.

Olver, f. of Þóra, V. 11. 2.

Olvusingar, IV. 19. 2.

Ondótt, sister of Olver Barna-karl, II. 9. 4; 17. 3.

Ondóttr í Viðvík, III. 9. 2-3.

Ondóttr Kráka Erlingson Knýtis, III. 13. 2-3; 14. 21; 15. 1-2; 15. 4-5;
20. 1: Gen. A. 13.

Ondóttzsyner, III. 14. 21; 15. 2-5   (see Ásmundr and Ásgrímr).

Ongull enn Svarte Þórkelsson, III. 16. 1.

Onundarsyner, V. 7. 2   (see Eilífr enn Auðge and Sigmundr Cleyker).

Onundr Bíldr Hróarsson, IV. 18. 7: V. 5. 2; 7. 2; 7. 5; 11. 6; 12. 2;
14. 7; 16. 1.

Onundr Bloeingsson, III. 20. 5.

Onundr Breiðskeggr Ulfarsson (al. Kromu-Oddsson), I. 10. 1; 10. 4:
V. 17. 2.

Onundr Colsson í Trolla-skóge, Gen. A. 12.

Onundr Eyvindarson Karpa, IV. 15. 6; 18. 3.

Onundr Hrollaugsson, IV. 14. 4.

Onundr at Mosfelle, f. of Skáld-Hrafn, II. 6. 4.

Onundr Sióne Ánason, II. 4. 8; 7. 5.

Onundr Tosco-bak, IV. 18. 2: Gen. A. 21.

Onundr Tréfótr Ófeigsson, II. 29. 1: Gen. B. 5.

Onundr Víkingsson, II. 24. 4.

Onundr Vís, III. 8. 5.

Onundr Þórgilsson Vámúla, III. 19. 5: Cr. 1. 3.

Onundr Þórkelsson, Pol. 15. 2.

Onundr Þórsteinsson ens Hvíta, IV. 3. 1.

OErlygr Baoðvarsson Vígsterkssonar, II. 20. 3; 27. 1.

OErlygr enn Gamle Hrappsson of Esjoberg, I. 6. 1-4; 10. 1; 11. 2:
II. 20. 6; 21. 45: V. 17. 2; 17. 5: p. 327. 16.

OErlygr, a freedman of Þórfinnr í Alftafirðe, II. 11. 4: Th. 8. 2.

Ormarr, f. of Hildr, I. 4. 4; see Ulfarr.

Ormarr, f. of Þórbiaorn enn Gaulverske, V. 10. 3.

Ormhildr Hróarsdótter, IV. 18. 1.

Ormr, a descendant of Þraostr Hermundarson, II. 30. 3.

Ormr Auðge Ulfsson ens Hvassa, V. 9. 5.

Ormr Aurge Herjolfsson, V. 3. 7.

Ormr Coðransson, Cr. 1. 4; 1. 5; 8. 7: Thorv. 1: Ch. 636.

Ormr Erpsson, II. 15. 7.

Ormr Eyjolfsson, chaplain to Bishop Thorlac, III. 4. 1: Þorl. 12. 9:
Od. 6. 4.

Ormr Fróðason, V. 10. 1; 10. 4.

Ormr (al. Grímr) enn Gamle Eyvindarson, V. 16. 4.

Ormr enn Gamle Ormsson, V. 16. 4.

Ormr enn Gamle, at Rauðalæk, Od. 1. 2.

Ormr Galmansson, III. 14. 12.

Ormr Gellisson, III. 15. 8.

Ormr Hallason ens Hvíta, III. 15. 8.

Ormr Hallzson, V. 15. 2.

Ormr Hermundarson, Gen. B. 14.

Ormr Ioansson Loptzsonar, Pol. 4. 3; 6. 3; 7. 2: Od. 2. 2.

Ormr enn Mióve, II. 7. 5.

Ormr í Ormsdal, III. 4. 2.

Ormr Skelja-mole Hrossbiarnarson, III. 5. 1: Gen. B. 5.

Ormr Skógar-nef Hámundarson, V. 7. 2: Gen. 5.

Ormr enn Sterke Stórolfsson, V. 4. 4; 4. 7; 6. 3; 7. 2: Gen. A. 5.

Ormr Tosco-bak Þóresson Snepils, III. 16. 1: Gen. A. 31: Cr. 1. 3.

Ormr, s. of Þórdís Biarnardótter, III. 11. 2.

Ormr Þóresson, III. 20. 2.

Ormr Þórfinnzson, II. 5. 4.

Ormr Þórkelsson Gollcars, V. 12. 3.

Ormr Þórvallzson (al. Galmansson), III. 14. 12.

Orn, Od. 5. 2.

Orn Ánarson, III. 20. 2.

Orn Biaornolfsson, I. 3. 1: Gen. B. 10: Th. 3. 3.

Orn Darrason, V. 16. 4.

Orn Eysteinsson í Fliótom, III. 6. 6.

Orn enn Gamle of Háreksstaðer, II. 3. 10.

Orn, kinsman of Geirmundr Heljar-skinn, II. 22. 1-2: III. 14. 9-11.

Orn Hyrna Þóresson, IV. 12. 1; 13. 1: Gen. B. 15 (Onarsson).

Orn Sterke Þórðarson Illoga, IV. 14. 10.

Orn Þórkelsson, Io. 12. 2.

Orn, the vagrant, III. 8. 9.

Orn í Véli-gerðe, V. 7. 1-2; 12. 2.

Ornolfr, a bishop, Mant. 6. 1: Lib. 8. 2.

Ornolfr Arnmóðsson ens Rauða, II. 20. 9; 21. 3.




Ornolfr Biaornolfsson, III. 16. 1: Gen. A. 31; 34.

Ornolfr Fisk-reke, II. 10. 1: Gen. A. 36: Th. 2. 3.

Ornolfr, f. of Halldórr, IV. 18. 6.

Ornolfr Heðinsson í Sóknadal, III. 15. 2.

Ornolfr of Ornolfsstaðir, II. 2. 5.

Ornolfr í Skógom, Cr. 1. 2.

Ornolfr Slétto-Biarnarson, III. 9. 2.

Ornolfr Þórðarson Slítanda, III. 14. 15; 15. 9.

Ósc Þórsteinsdótter Rauðs, II. 10. 5; 14. 1; 15. 12; 20. 1: Gen. A. 36:
Th. 7. 5: Lib. 4. 2.

Ósc Þórsteinsdótter Surtz, II. 20. 1.

Óspakr Bollason, Gen. B. 14.

Óspakr Osvifsson, II. 9. 3; 24. 1: Gen. B. 3: Cr. 3. 6.

Ósvaldr konungr enn Helge, Gen. A. 32.

Ósvaldr Yxna-Þóresson, IV. 3. 1: Gen. A. 28: Mant. 5. 6.

Osvifr enn Spake Helgason, II. 9. 3; 15. 8; 20. 7; 24. 1: III. 21. 3:
Gen. A. 36; B. 3: Th. 7. 3: Lib. 4. 2: Cr. 3. 6.

Otkatla, see Oddkatla.

Otkatla Þórgilsdótter, V. 13. 3.

Otkell, f. of Fiðr, V. 3. 4.

Otkell Hallkelsson or Kirkjo-boe, V. 7. 8; 15. 2: Gen. A. 15
(Skarfsson).

Otkell Þórbiarnarson Laxa-karls, V. 13. 3.

Ótryggr Hiaorleifsson ens Kvensama, II. 17. 1: Gen. A. 38 (Úblauðsson):
B. 12 (id.).

Óttarr, Lib. 306. 8.

Óttarr Biarnarson Austræna, II. 9. 3: Gen. B. 3: Th. 7. 3.

Óttarr Baollr, V. 7. 7: Gen. A. 12.

Óttarr Egilsson, Gen. A. 12.

Óttarr í Grímstungom, III. 5. 16.

Óttarr Hvalró Hróallzson, IV. 14. 4.

Óttarr Þórgeirsson Goða, III. 18. 1.

Otto enn Unge, Emperor, Cr. 3. 3.

Oxe Hialtason, Io. 9. 1.

OExna-Þórer, see Yxna-Þórer.

Ozorr, archbishop of Lund, Hv. 2. 9; 2. 11; 3. 2; 3. 6; 4. 3; 4. 11-12:
Io. 7. 2, &c.

Ozorr Arnarson, V. 16. 12.

Ozorr Ásbiarnarson í Backa-holte, IV. 15. 3: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 25.

Ozorr frá Breið-aó, Gen. B. 15.

Ozorr Brynjolfsson ens Gamla, IV. 5. 2.

Ozorr Egilsson, V. 16. 12.

Ozorr Eyvindarson, V. 16. 6.



Ozorr Herjolfsson, IV. 11. 4.

Ozorr enn Hvíte Þórleifsson, V. 10. 5; 12. 1-2.

Ozorr Keileselgr Hrollaugsson, IV. 12. 2; 14. 4; 14. 10: Gen. A. 19:
B. 10: Lib. 305. 12.

Ozorr Slaga-collr, IV. 3. 8.

Ozorr Þórgrimsson Campa, V. 12. 1.




P


Páll, bishop, see Póll.

Páll Solvason of Reykjaholt, II. 17. 6: Hv. 4. 10: Þorl. 11. 6.

Páll Þórðarson í Vatz-firðe, Mant. I. 7: Hv. 5. 13.

Palna-Tóki, pp. 324-5.

Papar, Irish monks, Prol.; IV. 16. 1.

Paschalis II, Pope, Lib. 10. 12: Cr. 10. 9: Hv. 2. 9; 2. 16: Io. 7. 5;
7. 7.

Patrecr, apostle of Ireland, Hv. epil.

Patrecr enn Helge, bishop in the Southreys, I. 6. 1-2.

Pétr Bárðarson, Gm. 612.

Pétr, bishop of Roskilde, Pol. 3. 5.

Pétr Jónsson, p. 639. 5.

Pétr frá Óse, III. 3. 1.

Pétr Snorrason í Skógarnese, Gen. B. 10.

Petrus, an Armenian bishop, Mant. 6. 1: Lib. 8. 2.

Philippus, earl, Pol. 15. 2.

Philippus, King of France, Hv. 2. 16.

Philippus, King of Sweden, Lib. 10. 12: Cr. 10. 9.

Philippus Sæmundarson, Gen. B. 10.

Póll, bishop of Bergen, Þorl. 8. 2.

Póll Ioansson, bishop of Scalholt, Þorl. 4. 4; 7. 2; 12. 2; 14. 1:
Pol. 1. 1, &c.: Od. 2. 2: Gm. 611, 612: pp. 640. 13; 641. 4.




R


Ráðbarðr, f. of Rannvér, Gen. A. 32.

Raðormr í Vetleifsholte, IV. 17. 4: V. 9. 8; 9. 11.

Radulfr (al. Randulfr) Yxna-Þóresson, III. 14. 20.

Rafn, see also Hrafn.

Rafn Oddzson, Herra, II. 22. 5: pp. 639. 3, 11; 640. 19.

Rafn Þórkelsson ens Svarta, III. 16. 1.

Raforta, d. of Cearval, King of the Irish, III. 13. 2: Gen. A. 32:
Th. 1. 4.

Rage Áleifsson Hialta, I. 9. 4: II. 15. 14: Gen. A. 18.

Ragnarr Loðbrók, III. 4. 1; 11. 1: Gen. A. 32; 35-6; B. 5: Th. 1. 4:
Mant. 5. 1: Lib. 1. 1; 306. 13.

Ragneiðr Arnórsdótter, p. 641. 40.

Ragneiðr Eyjolfsdótter, III. 15. 13: Cr. 2. 4.

Ragneiðr Þórhallzdótter, Þorl. 4. 4: Pol. 1. 1: Od. 2. 2; 6. 1; 6. 5.

Ragnhildr Ragnarsdótter Loðbrókar, Mant. 5. 1.

Ragnhildr Sigurðardótter Hiartar, V. 11. 1: Mant. 5. 2.

Ragnildr Barkardótter, p. 640. 7, 20, 24.

Ragnildr Hrólfsdótter Nefjo, IV. 14. 1.

Rane Ísólfsson, IV. 18. 3.

Rannveig, Gm. 606.

Rannveig Eiríksdótter, IV. 3. 1.

Rannveig Eyvindardótter, V. 5. 1-2.

Rannveig Gnúpsdótter, V. 9. 8.

Rannveig Griótgarðardótter Hlaða-jarls, II. 23. 2; 24. 1.

Rannveig (Sigmundardótter, or) Sigvatzdótter ens Rauða, V. 5. 2;
7. 2; Gen. A. 5.

Rannveig Sigurðardótter, Gen. B. 13.

Rannveig, d. of Steinvaor (or Steinunn) Brannzdótter, II. 23. 2:
IV. 3. 7.

Rannveig Teitzdótter, Mant. 1. 7.

Rannveig Þórgeirsdótter, III. 8. 1: Gen. A. 28.

Rannveig Þórsteinsdótter Tialdstoeðings, V. 8. 6.

Rannvér Ráðbarðzson, Gen. A. 32.

Rauða-Biaorn (= Biaorn of Dalsminne), II. 3. 11.

Rauða-Biaorn of Rauða-Biarnarstaðir, II. 4. 5.

Rauðloekingar, IV. 15. 4.

Rauðmelingar, p. 328.

*Rauðr Ceallacsson, V. 7. 1.

Rauðr Gunnarsson. II. 15. 14.

Rauðr of Rauðsgil, I. 10. 5.

Rauðr Rugga, III. 9. 4; 14. 5.

Raumr Iotun-biarnarson, III. 5. 1: Gen. B. 5.

Refr frá Barðe, III. 11. 2: Cr. 2. 3.

Refr enn Mikle, II. 5. 6.

Refr enn Rauðe, IV. 2. 1-2.

Refr Steinbiarnarson, IV. 2. 2.

Refr Þórsteinsson, I. 6. 7-8; 7. 7: II. 21. 1.

Reginleif Sæmundardótter, III. 7. 1: Gen. A. 32.

Reinn Styrmisson, III. 19. 5.

Reistr Biarneyja-Ketilsson, III. 22. 2.

Reykhyltingar, Od. 4. 3.

Reyknesingar, II. 19. 3: Gen. B. 11.

Reyne-Biaorn, see Biaorn at Reyne.

Reyrketill, V. 3. 6.

Rifla (or Hrifla) Þórsteinsson, pp. 639. 8; 641. 15.

Ríkarðr, King of England, Pol. 15. 2.

Ríkini, a French priest, Io. 12.4; 13. 5-6: p. 592.

Riúpa Arnallzdótter, III. 7. 1; 11. 2.

Riúpa Hrútzdótter, II. 15. 10.

Riúpa Þórkelsdótter, II. 15. 8.

Róarr, f. of Slétto-Biaorn, III. 9. 2.

Rodolfr, a foreign bishop, Mant. 6. 1-2: Hv. 1. 11.

Roðrekr, a thrall of Hrosskell í Svartár-dal. III. 7. 7-8.

Raognvaldr herkonungr, p. 326. 7.

Raognvaldr Kale, earl of the Orkneys, Mant. 2. 1.

Raognvaldr Mæra-jarl Eysteinsson Glumro, II. 20. 2; 23. 1: III. 22. 1:
IV. 14. 1-2: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 19: B. 7. 10: Lib. 2. 1.

Raonguðr, a freedman of Eiríkr or Goðdaolom, III. 7. 8.

Rúnolfr Ketilsson (biskups), II. 7. 2: Gen. B. 14: Hv. 5. 5.

Rúnolfr Naddaðarson, see Brondolfr: (Gen. A. 15).

Rúnolfr Ulfsson Aurgoða, V. 9. 12; 13. 6: Gen. A. 2: Cr. 1. 2; 6. 1;
6. 3; 7. 1; 8. 2; 8. 10.

Rúnolfr, f. of Valgerðr, Gen. A. 32.

Rúnolfr Þórláksson, I. 9. 4: V. 13. 4: Lib. 10. 10: Cr. 10. 9:
Hv. 3. 1.

Rúnolfr Þórsteinsson, Gen. A. 17.




S


Salbiaorg Berdlo-Káradótter, I. 8. 1.

Salgerðr Arngeirsdótter, III. 18. 1.

Salgerðr Iónsdótter, p. 639. 13; 640. 13.

Salgerðr Steinolfsdótter Birtings, II. 20. 8.

Salgerðr Steinolfsdótter or Hrísey, III. 14. 4.

Salgerðr (al. Valgerðr) Ulfsdótter ens Skiálga, II. 22. 5.

Sámr Barkarson, II. 10. 5.

Sámr Þórsteinsson Surtz, II. 20. 1.

Sandfellingar, IV. 15. 3.

Sandvíkingar, IV. 10. 4.

Saxe Alfarensson, II. 7. 1.

*Scialldbeorn, a thrall of Hiaorleifr Hroðmarsson, I. 3. 4.

*Score enn ellre, an Irish thrall of Cetill Gufa, II. 20. 3; 20. 5.

*Score, a freedman of Cetil Gufa, I. 9. 4: II. 20. 3.

Scúmr Ceartansson, II. 5. 9.

Sela-Kálfr Oddzson, III. 8. 4.

Sel-Þórer Grímsson, I. 10. 3: II. 5. 2-4: V. 17. 2.

Seyðfirðingar, IV. 10. 1.

Síðo-Hallr Þórsteinsson, III. 21. 2: IV. 12. 2; 14. 3-4: V. 17. 4:
Gen. A. 19; 25; B. 10; 15: Lib. 7. 1; 7. 6; 305. 12; Cr. 1. 2; 4. 2;
8. 6-7; p. 418: Hv. 4. 1: Io. 1. 1.

Síðo-menn, Gen. B. 10: Lib. 2. 1.

Sigarr konungr á Steig, III. 16. 5.

Sigfastr (al. Sighvatr), father-in-law of King (earl?) Solvar,
III. 13. 2.

Sigfúss Ásgrímsson Elliða-Grímssonar, III. 15. 5.

Sigfúss Elliða-Grímsson, I. 6. 8: Gen. A. 13.

Sigfúss Grímsson, priest, Pol. 10. 1.

Sigfúss Loðmundarson, f. of Sæmundr fróðe, I. 6. 8: V. 8. 7: Gen. A. 1;
13: p. 640. 11.

Sigfúss Sigmundarson í Hlíð (or rather Sigvatzson ens Rauða, see
Pedigree, p. 238), V. 5. 2; 6. 2 (Vigfúss); 8. 6: Gen. A. 5-6.

Sigfúss Sigvatzson, Nj. 364, 367.

Sigmundr Cleyker Onundarson Bíldz, IV. 17. 2; 18. 7: V. 7. 2.

Sigmundr Gnúpa-Bárðarson, III. 17. 2; 21. 1: IV. 15. 5: Gen. A. 31; 34.

Sigmundr, f. of Goðrún, Gen. B. 14.

Sigmundr Ketilsson Þistils, II. 6. 1; 6. 6: III. 22. 5.

Sigmundr Lambason, Gen. A. 7.

Sigmundr, f. of Niáll í Skógom, V. 2. 2.

Sigmundr Ormsson, Pol. 15. 2.

Sigmundr Sigvatzson ens Rauða  (or rather b. of Sigvatr Raude, see
Pedigree, p. 238), V. 4. 7; 5. 2; 7. 2.

Sigmundr, a freedman of Skalla-Grímr, II. 4. 4.

Sigmundr Valsson (al. Valason), IV. 19. 1.

Sigmundr á Vestfold, III. 9. 4.

Sigmundr Volsungsson, mythical King, Mant. 5. 1.

Sigmundr Þórbeinesson, Th. 8. 3.

Sigmundr Þórgilsson, Cr. 10. 10.

Sigmundr Þórkelsson, III. 9. 2; 21. 2.

Signý Óblauðsdótter, II. 20. 3; 27. 1.

Signý Sigvatzdótter, III. 13. 2; 15. 2.

Signý Valbrannzdótter, I. 9. 1; 10. 1.

Signý Valþiófsdótter, I. 6. 6 (= Signý Valbrannzdótter?).

Sigríðr Hafliðadótter, Mant. 1. 7.

Sigríðr (Sigurðardótter), V. 5. 2.

Sigríðr Sigvatzdótter, p. 640. 41.

Sigríðr Sleito-Biarnardótter, II. 22. 8.

Sigríðr Snorradótter Goða, Gen. B. 13.

Sigríðr Þórarensdótter, I. 11. 3.

Sigríðr Þórarensdótter Falkasonar, p. 642. 1.

Sigríðr Þórðardótter Hreðo, Gen. B. 16.

Sigríðr Þórgeirsdótter Goða, III. 18. 1.

Sigroeðr iarl enn Ríke Eysteinsson Glumro, II. 14. 1; 14. 4.

Sigtryggr Leysinge, Gen. A. 9.

Sigtryggr Snarfare, I. 8. 1: V. 4. 1.

Sigurðr Bióða-Skalle Eiríksson, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5: Mant. 1. 5.

Sigurðr byscop enn Ríke, III. 20. 2.

Sigurðr Fáfnes-bane Sigmundarson, Gen. B. 12: Mant. 5. 1.

Sigurðr Grímsson Kaogors, II. 24. 2.

Sigurðr Harallzson, King of Norway, Hv. 5. 12-13.

Sigurðr Hiaortr, Norwegian King, I. 8. 1: V. 11. 1: Mant. 5. 2.

Sigurðr Hlaða-iarl Hákonarson, V. 11. 2.

Sigurðr Hringr Rannvésson, Gen. A. 32; B. 5: Mant. 5. 1.

Sigurðr Hríse Harallzson ens Hárfagra, V. 12. 1 (?): Lib. 9. 1.

Sigurðr enn Hvíte, Mant. 5. 4.

Sigurðr Ioansson Loptzsonar, Od. 2. 2: p. 640. 13.

Sigurðr Jónsson, Ch. 635 (? = prec.).

Sigurðr Iósteinsson, I. 7. 11.

Sigurðr enn Landverske Helgason, V. 12. 4.

Sigurðr Liótzson Laongo-baks, V. 12. 4.

Sigurðr Magnússon, Iorsalafare, King of Norway, Lib. 10. 12: Hv. 3. 13:
Io. 7. 7; 14. 3.

Sigurðr Mársson, I. 3. 10.

Sigurðr Ormr-í-Auga Ragnarsson, Gen. A. 35-6; B. 12: Th. 1. 4:
Mant. 5. 1-2: Lib. 306. 13.

Sigurðr Ormsson at Swinefell, Od. 1. 1: Gm. 610-12.

Sigurðr enn Ríke, Earl of the Orkneys, I. 1. 1.

Sigurðr Slefa (Eiríksson), Norwegian King, Gen. B. 15.

Sigurðr Slembidiakn, Hv. 4. 12.

Sigurðr Svínhaofðe, II. 7. 7.

Sigurðr Sýr Hálfdanarson, Norwegian King, Mant. I. 1; 3. 2: Lib. 9. 1:
Io. 4. 5.

Sigurðr Víkinga-Kárason, Gen. B. 6.

Sigurðr Þórarensson, IV. 1. 2.

Sigurðr Þóresson Hundz, Gen. B. 13.

Sigurðr Þórgrímsson, V. 16. 7.

Sigvalde, Earl, Cr. 9. 2.

Sigvatr Brannzson, Gen. B. 14.

Sigvatr Hálfdanarson, Ch. 637.

Sigvatr Hallbiarnarson, the priest, III. 4. 1.

Sigvatr or Hlíðom, III. 13. 2; 15. 2.

Sigvatr enn Rauðe, V. 5. 1-2; 7. 2; 17. 2: Gen. A. 3; 5-7.

Sigvatr Sturloson, p. 639. 2.

Sigvatr Surtzson, Laogsaogomaðr, II. 21. 1: IV. 16. 1: Lib. 9. 7.

Sigvatr (al. Sigmundr) Þórarensson, V. 16. 10.

Silfr-stoeðingar, III. 8. 6.

Simon, h. of Herþrúðr, II. 6. 4.

Simon Jorundarson, Cr. 10. 8.

Simon enn Mikle, priest, Gm. 610.

Skafte Tanna (al. Tans)son, III. 4. 2.

Skafte Þóroddzson Laogsaogomaðr, IV. 9. 5: V. 9. 8; 13. 2; 16. 6:
Gen. A. 16: Lib. 8. 3-4: pp. 329. 3; 366. 20; 368. 1.

Skage Skoftason, III. 15. 12: Cr. 2. 4.

Skagfirðingar, Gen. A. 33.

Skald-Helge Þórðarson, II. 3. 4: III. 2. 3.

Skald-Hrafn Onundarson, II. 6. 4: V. 9. 8.

Skald-Refr Gestsson, II. 5. 6; 5. 11: Cr. 5. 4.

Skalla-Grímr Kveld-Ulfsson, I. 8. 1-2; 9. 4-5: II. 4. 1-15; 15. 9;
20. 5: V. 16. 6; 16. 9; 17. 2; 17. 4.

Skamkell (at Hofe), V. 7. 8.

Skarð-Snorre Narfason, Gen. B. 9-10.

Skarfr Hallkelsson, Gen. A. 15.

Skarpheðinn, f. of Bergþóra, Gen. A. 8.

Skarpheðinn Véfroeðarson, III. 5. 15; 6. 3.

Skate Erpsson, II. 15. 7.

Skautaðar-Skegge, III. 2. 1: Gen. A. 37 (Skútaðar-Skegge).

Skefill enn Hauk-doelske, V. 12. 4.

Skefill á Reykjastraond, III. 7. 2.

Skegg-Ávallde Ingiallzson, III. 5. 16.

Skegg-Biaorn, Cr. 5. 2.

Skegg-Brodde Biarnason, IV. 3. 1: V. 9. 1: Mant. 4. 1.

Skegge Ásgautzson, V. 9. 10-11: Cr. 8. 2.

Skegge Biarnason, V. 7. 9: Lib. 10. 2: p. 640. 48.

Skegge Baoðolfsson, III. 15. 3; 20. 1-2.

Skegge Bollason, V. 2. 2.

Skegge Brannzson, V. 2. 2: Gen. B. 14.

Skegge Collason, II. 7. 2.

Skegge, f. of Loðmundr, IV. 16. 1.

Skegge Niálsson, V. 2. 2.

Skegge Skammhondungr Gamlason, III. 1. 2.

Skegge í Skógom, I. 7. 8.

Skegge Þórarensson, II. 15. 14.

Skegge Þórðarson, Cr. 2. 2.

Skegge Þórgeirsson, f. of Hialte, V. 9. 9; 13. 4: Gen. B. 7.

Skegge, f. of Þórsteinn Smiðr, III. 14. 12.

Skegge Þórsteinsson Tialdstoeðings, V. 8. 6.

Skialda-Biaorn Herfinnzson, II. 18. 2: 28. 1-2.

Skialgr á Iaðre, III. 12. 7.

Skíðe enn Gamle Bárðarson, III. 6. 6; 7. 1: Gen. A. 32: Cr. 1. 1.

Skíðe or Skíða-dale, III. 12. 7.

Skíðe, f. of Þórgerðr, Gen. A. 32.

Skinna-Biaorn Skautaðar-Skeggjason, III. 2. 1: Gen. A. 37.

Skiaoldolfr í Streite, IV. 11. 5.

Skiaoldolfr Vémundarson, IV. 3. 6.

Skofte, f. of Skage í Siglo-vík, III. 15. 12: Cr. 2. 4.

Skofte Þórðarson, II. 5. 6.

Skógstrendingar, Th. 9. 3.

Skógverjar, Gen. A. 8; 20; B. 14.

Skorar-Geirr, see Þórgeirr Skorar-Geirr.

Skúle Egilsson, Cr. 10. 10.

Skúle Herkja Gunnolfsson, IV. 1. 1.

Skúle Iorundarson, II. 7. 2.

Skúle Rifluson, p. 639. 8; (Egilsson Hriflusonar) 641. 15.

Skúle Þórsteinsson, Cr. 1. 5.

Skúmr, f. of Þórkell the abbot, III. 20. 2: Pol. 15. 2.

Skúmr Þróndarson, II. 4. 15.

Skæringr Ketilbiarnarson, V. 14. 3.

Skæringr Þórolfsson, V. 3. 2.

Sleito-(or Slétto-)Biaorn Hróarsson, II. 15. 9; 18. 2; 22. 8; 28. 1:
III. 9. 2-3; 11. 2.

Sleito-Helge, II. 30. 4: III. 5. 16.

Smiðkell Þórvarðarson, I. 10. 2: II. 2. 2: III. 11. 2.

Smiðr Ingimundarson ens Gamla, III. 5. 3; 5. 13.

Smið-Sturla Ceartansson, II. 15. 9 b: Gen. B. 2.

Snerir Þóroddzson, Gen. B. 9; 11.

Snertlingar, III. 16. 3.

Sniallr Vatnarsson, Mant. 5. 4.

Sniall-Steinn Baugsson, V. 7. 1-2.

Snorre Álfsson, II. 15. 11; 21. 1.

Snorre Bárðarson, Gm. 607. 612.

Snorre Carlsefnesson, III. 11. 2: Lib. 305. 18: Hv. 3. 1.

Snorre Goðe Þórgrímsson, II. 6. 5-6; 8. 1; 9. 3; 10. 5; 11. 6; 15. 4;
15. 14; 20. 2; 22. 8; 23. 2: III. 6. 4; Gen. A. 36; B. 13: Lib. 1. 1:
p. 326. 18: Cr. 1. 2; 8. 5; 8. 10: Hv. 1. 12.

Snorré Halldórsson, pp. 641. 23; 642. 5.

Snorre Hlíðmanna-Goðe Eyvindarson, III. 14. 21.

Snorre Haofða-Þórðarson, III. 11. 2.

Snorre Húnbogason, Laogsaogomaðr, II. 18. 1: Gen. B. 9-10.

Snorre Iaorundarson, II. 19. 5; 20. 2; 23. 2.

Snorre Kálfsson, Gen. B. 15.

Snorré Magnússon á Melum, pp. 641. 2, 9, &c.; 642. 38, 43.

Snorré  Markússon  á Melum, pp. 641. 14, 21, &c.; 642. 9, &c.

Snorre, f. of Pétr í Skógarnese, Gen. B. 10.

Snorre Snorrason Goða, Gen. B. 13.

Snorre Sturloson, Od. 4. 2: Ch. 635: p. 639. 2.

Snorre Svertingsson, Hv. 4. 10.

Snorre Þórbrannzson, II. 11. 6; 12. 9.

Snorre Þórðarson í Vatzfirðe, II. 15. 9 b: Gen. B. 2: Mant. 7. 1.

Snorre Þórðarson Sturlosonar, II. 23. 2.

Snorre Þórðarson under Felle, Gen. B. 10.

Snaortr Hrafnsson Hlymreks-fara, II. 18. 1: Gen. B. 9.

Snaortr Þórmóðarson, III. 16. 3.

Snæbiaorn Eyvindarson Austmannz, II. 26. 2.

Snæbiaorn Galte Holmsteinsson, II. 26. 2-4.

Snælaug Haognadótter, Od. 3. 1; 4. 1-2: p. 641. 20, 39.

Socke Þórðarson, III. 19. 3-4.

Soeckolfr of Breiðabólstaðr, II. 15. 6.

Soelge Hrólfsson, IV. 12. 1: Gen. B. 16.

Solmundr í Ásbiarnar-nese Eilífsson Arnar, II. 15. 9 b: III. 5. 13;
6. 6: Gen. B. 2.

Solmundr Þórbiarnarson Iarla-kappa, V. 13. 5.

Solmundr Þórolfsson, I. 6. 8.

Solvar Gautakonungr (-iarl), III. 13. 2.

Solve Ásólfsson, I. 7. 5.

Solve Gunnsteinsson, Gen. A. 10.

Solve Haognason, II. 17. 1.

Solve Hrólfsson, of Geitland, I. 11. 2: II. 17. 6.

Solve Magnússon, II. 17. 6.

Solve enn Prúðe Ásbrannzson, III. 3. 1.

Solve í Solva-dal, II. 12. 9.

Solve of Solva-hamarr, II. 5. 12.

Solve Þórðarson, pp. 639. 1; 640. 28.

Solveíg Iónsdótter Loptzsonar, II. 22. 6.

Sólvaor Ásgrímsdótter, Mant. 1. 7.

Sólvaor Herjolfsdótter, Gen. A. 25.

Sólvaor Hundolfsdótter iarls, V. 11. 1: Mant. 5. 2 (Húnolfs d.).

Soerkver, King of Sweden, Pol. 15. 2.

Sorle Brodd-Helgason, Gen. A. 26; 29.

Sóte under Sóta-felle, III. 3. 2.

Sóte of Sóta-nes, II. 4. 3; 30. 1: III. 20. 5.

Saoxolfr Haofða-Þórðarson, III. 11. 2.

Spak-Baoðvarr Ondóttzson, III. 9. 2: Cr. 1. 3; 2. 3.

Stafn-Grímr Hranason, I. 10. 6.

Starkaðr Barkarson under Þríhyrninge, V. 6. 3; 7. 8: Gen. A. 4; 12.

Starkaðr enn Gamle, V. 13. 1.

Starkaðr Þórðarson Freysgoða (?), Gen. A. 25: Nj. 364. 4.

Starre í Goðdaolom, Cr. 1. 2.

Starre Þórgestzson, of Holm, I. 7. 2; 11. 3.

Stefnir Þórgilsson, Cr. 3. 5-6; 9. 1-2: Thorv. 7.

Steigar-Þórer, Gen. B. 5.

Steinarr, a follower of the sons of Ondóttr, III. 15. 2.

Steinarr Onundarson, II. 4. 8.

Steinbiaorn Cortr Refsson, IV. 2. 2; 3. 1.

Steinbiaorn, f. of Illoge, II. 20. 9.

Steinbiaorn enn Sterke Ásgeirsson, II. 3. 4.

Steine Þórðarson, V. 5. 2.

Steine Þórvarðzson, priest, Ch. 632.

Steinfiðr or Steinfinnr Reyrketilsson, V. 3. 6.

Steingrímr Eyjolfsson ens Grá, II. 24. 2.

Steingrímr Eyvindarson, p. 639. 14.

Steingrímr Goðmundarson, II. 15. 9 b: Gen. B. 2.

Steingrímr Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

Steingrímr Ornolfsson at Kroppe, III. 14. 15; 19. 1.

Steingrímr Trolle, II. 29. 3: Gen. B. 11.

Steingrímr Þórðarson Hreðo, Gen. B. 16.

Steingrímr Þórgrímsson, II. 20. 8.

Steinmóðr Conalsson, II. 15. 14: V. 13. 1.

Steinmóðr or Diúpadal, Cr. 1. 5.

Steinmóðr Olvesson Barnakarls, II. 15. 14: V. 13. 1: Mant. 5. 5.

Steinn Auðunnarson, II. 8. 5.

Steinn Brandax- (Brands ?)son, IV. 9. 5; 19. 2-3.

... steinn Colgrímsson, I. 7. 7.

Steinn enn Danske Þórgilsson, II. 20. 9.

Steinn Goðmundarson, II. 15. 9 b: Gen. B. 2.

Steinn Herdísarson, the poet, II. 9. 3.

Steinn Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

Steinn Haofða-Þórðarson, III. 11. 2.

Steinn Miok-siglande Vigbiodsson, II. 4. 14; 11. 8; 20. 1.

Steinn enn Snialle, see Sniall-Steinn.

Steinn Þórarensson, II. 15. 14.

Steinn Þórðarson Freysgoða, Gen. A. 25.

Steinn Þórfinnzson, I. 9. 4: II. 5. 4.

Steinn Þórgestzson Laogsaogomaðr, II. 11. 8: Lib. 8. 5.

Steinolfr Birtingr Einarsson, II. 20. 8.

Steinolfr, neighbour of Brand frá Gnúpom, IV. 18. 2.

Steinolfr (al. Steinmóðr) Gunnarsson, III. 15. 17.

Steinolfr Gunnolfsson, III. 12. 8.

Steinolfr í Hranndal, II. 4. 13; 4. 15.

Steinolfr Ingiallzson, III. 14. 4.

Steinolfr enn Láge, s. of Olver Barnakarl, III. 14. 4: V. 13. 1:
Mant. 5. 5.

Steinolfr enn Láge Hrólfsson, II. 17. 3; 18. 1-2; 18. 5; 19. 1; 30. 1:
Gen. B. 9: Th. 7. 3.

Steinolfr Mársson, III. 19. 4.

Steinolfr Óláfsson Becks, III. 12. 6.

Steinolfr Olvesson Barnakarls, see St. enn Láge.

Steinolfr í Þiórsár-dale, III. 22. 3-4.

Steinolfr Þórgautzson, II. 20. 8; 23. 2.

Steinolfr Þórkelsson Þórðarsonar, II. 22. 6.

Steinroeðr Heðinsson, III. 6. 6.

*Steinroeðr Mel-patrexson, V. 16. 2-3.

Steinroeðr enn Ramme Þóresson Þursa-sprenges, III. 14. 17-18.

Steinuðr, see Steinunn.

Steinunn Aradótter, Gen. B. 10.

Steinunn Bergsdótter, III. 14. 4: Mant. 5. 1.

Steinunn Biarnardótter, p. 641. 21, 27.

Steinunn Brannzdótter, IV. 3. 7 (cf. Steinvaor).

Steinunn Dalcsdótter, II. 5. 6: (Cr. 5. 4).

Steinunn en Gamla, V. 16. 9-10.

Steinunn af Hitárnese, Ch. 631.

Steinunn Hrafnsdótter, II. 22. 5: pp. 639. 11; 640. 18.

Steinunn Hrútzdótter, II. 4. 15; 15. 10.

Steinunn Jónsdótter, p. 639. 5.

Steinunn Óladótter, p. 639. 13.

Steinunn Snorradótter, p. 640. 3.

Steinunn Þórðardótter Oddleifssonar, m. of Hrafn Sveinbiarnarson,
II. 20. 8.

Steinunn Þórgrímsdótter or Borgar-haofn, IV. 11. 8: Hv. 2. 1; 2. 8;
2. 12.

Steinunn Þórgrímsdótter ens Háva, IV. 3. 1.

Steinvaor Barkardótter, Gen. A. 12.

Steinvaor (al. Steinunn) Brannzdótter, II. 23. 2: (IV. 3. 7).

Steinvaor (al. Steinunn) Dalcsdótter, Cr. 5. 4.

Steinvaor Síðo-Hallzdótter, Gen. A. 25.

Steinvaor, m. of Sigvat, Ch. 637.

Steinþórr Óleifsson, II. 15. 9; 29. 1: Gen. B. 5.

Steinþórr Þórláksson, of Eyre, II. 8. 1; 8. 5: Gen. B. 13: p. 326. 17.

Stephanus, Armenian bishop, Mant. 6. 1: Lib. 8. 2.

Staoðfirðingar, IV. 11. 1.

Staorkoðr, see Starkaðr.

Stórólfr Hoengsson, V. 4. 4; 4. 7; 7. 2; 7. 4: Gen. 5.

Straumfirðingar, II. 5. 8; 8. 3.

Sturla Bárðarson, Gm. 607.

Sturla Goðe Calmansson, I. 10. 2: II. 1. 1.

Sturla Þióðreksson, see Víga-Sturla.

Sturla Jónsson Petrssonar, p. 639. 4.

Sturla Sigvatzson, p. 639. 3.

Sturla Þórðarson enn Gamle (Hvamm-Sturla), II. 5. 8; 15. 10; 20. 2:
Gen. A. 1; B. 2: Od. 5. 1: pp. 639. 2; 640. 29, &c.

Sturla Þórðarson Laogmaðr, the historian, V. 17. 1: Gen. B. 10.

Sturlungar, III. 6. 4: V. 6. 2: Gen. A. 1; 32; B. 13.

Sturlu-syner, IV. 14. 4: pp. 639. 2; 640. 29.

Styrbiaorn, explorer of the Gunnbiarnarsker, II. 26. 4.

Styrbiaorn Svíakappe, p. 326. 20.

Styrbiaorn Þórarensson, III. 6. 6.

Styrkárr Sveinbiarnarson, V. 16. 12: Ch. 636.

Styrmer enn Fróðe Kárason (al. Hermundarson), V. 17. 1: Ch. 635.

Styrmer Hermundarson, Gen. B. 14.

Styrmer Reinsson, III. 19. 5: Cr. 10. 10: p. 641. 11.

Styrmer Skeggjason, I. 7. 8.

Styrmer Þórgeirsson, III. 7. 4: Gen. B. 11.

Súgande Þórarensson, V. 16. 7.

Sulke konungr af Roga-lande, II. 17. 3.

Sumarliðe Herjolfsson, V. 4. 6-7.

Sumarliðe Hrappsson, II. 15. 7.

Sumarliðe Loðmundarson, IV. 9. 5; 19. 2.

Sumarliðe, f. of Surtr enn Hvíte, IV. 19. 2.

Sumarliðe Þórgeirsson Rauðs, II. 26. 4.

Súrr, see Þórbiaorn Súrr.

Surtr Atlason, II. 5. 10.

Surtr Bollason, II. 15. 8.

Surtr Grettisson, Gen. B. 5.

Surtr enn Hvíte Skafta-stiúpr Sumarliðason, IV. 18. 2.

Surtr Smiðr Goðbrannzson, II. 5. 10.

Surtr Þórsteinsson, II. 21. 1: IV. 16. 1   (= Svartr Ásbiarnarson,
Gen. A. 23.   Surtr Ásbiarnarson, Cr. 4. 3).

Svaði á Svaðastaoðom, p. 413.

Svana Herroeðardótter, II. 8. 1.

Svanlaug Þórmóðardótter, I. 11. 1.

Svanr Biarnarson, II. 29. 2.

Svarfdoelar, III. 14. 6.

*Svart-cell of Eyre, I. 6. 5.

Svarthaofðe Auðunnarson Stota, II. 8. 5.

Svarthaofðe Biarnarson Goll-bera, I. 9. 1: II. 5. 7.

Svarthaofðe Dufgusson, p. 639. 12.

Svartkell Geirsson, I. 9. 6.

Svartr Ásbiarnarson, Gen. A. 23   (see Surtr Þorsteinsson).

*Svartr, an Irish thrall, II. 20. 3; 20. 5.

Svartr Iorondarson Goða, p. 640. 11.

Svartr Ulfsson, V. 8. 7: Gen. A. 1.

Sváse Iotunn, IV. 12. 1.

Svegðer, early king, Lib. 306. 5.

Sveinbiaorn Ásmundarson Sveinbiarnarsonar, V. 16. 12.

Sveinbiaorn Ásmundarson Þórgerðarsonar, II. 4. 13.

Sveinbiaorn Bárðarson ens Svarta, II. 20. 8; 22. 5.

Sveinbiaorn Hrafnkelsson Goða, IV. 6. 3.

Sveinbiaorn Óláfsson, V. 16. 12.

Sveinbiaorn, s. of Þórbiaorg, IV. 17. 4.

Sveinn Ástríðarson, King of Denmark, Io. 2. 1; 4. 1.

Sveinn Bergþórsson, Gen. B. 16.

Sveinn Bryggjofótr Ásláksson, Gen. B. 16.

Sveinn Harallzson Tiugoskegg, King of Denmark, Lib. 7. 9: Thorv. 2-3.

Sveinn Hvammz-Sturloson, Od. 5. 1-2.

Sveinn Ulfsson, King of Denmark, Hv. 1. 12.

Sveinungr í Sveinungsvík, III. 22. 5.

Sveinungr Þóresson Líno, IV. 8. 3.

Sveinungr, a follower of Þorkell Trefill, II. 26. 4.

Sverrer, King of Norway, Pol. 3. 2; 3. 6; 7. 2; 8. 1; 14. 5; 15. 2:
Gm. 615.

Svertingr Grímsson, II. 20. 2: III. 15. 5: Gen. A. 1 n.

Svertingr Hafr-Biarnarson, I. 10. 3: IV. 17. 4: Hv. 4. 1.

Svertingr Hrolleifsson (al. Hiaorleifsson), V. 9. 8; 16. 3: Mant. 5. 5.

Svertingr Rúnolfsson, V. 13. 6: Cr. 6. 3; 6. B*; 7. 1.

Sviðo-Cáre, see Cáre Saolmundarson.

Svína-Baoðvarr Caunsson, IV. 12. 1: Gen. B. 16 (Baoðvarr Saolgason).

Sæbiaorn (al. Snæbiaorn) Goðe Hrafnsson, V. 4. 7.

Sæhildr, w. of Gizorr Hallzson. II. 23. 2: IV. 3. 7.

Sæmingr, f. of Gríss, III. 5. 16.

Sæmundr (Grímsson), f. of Bishop Brandr, I. 7. 8: V. 7. 6.

Sæmundr Harallzson, Ch. 637.

Sæmundr Jónsson í Odda Loftzsonar, Gen. B. 15: Pol. 4. 3; 6. 3; 7. 2;
7. 5: Od. 2. 1; 6. 6: Gm. 611: p. 640. 13.

Sæmundr Loftzson í Odda, Gen. A. 1 n.   ( = Sæmundr Jónsson
Loftzsonar).

Sæmundr Sigfússon enn Fróðe, I. 2. 2; 6. 8: III. 7. 1: IV. 14. 4:
V. 8. 7; 9. 1: Gen. A. 1; 13; 36; B. 10. 15: Mant. 1. 3: Lib. pr. 1;
7. 9; 9. 7; 10. 3: Cr. 10. 4; 10. 8: Hv. 2. 7; 3. 13: Pol. 1. 1:
Io. 4. 4; 5. 1; 6. 2: Od. 2. 4: pp. 599, 637, 640.

Sæmundr enn Suðreyske í Soemundarhlíð, III. 5. 2; 5. 12; 6. 6; 7. 1-2;
8. 3; 11. 3; 12. 2: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 32.

Sæuðr Skalla-Grímsdótter, II. 4. 3; 4. 11.




T


Tanne, f. of Atle, II. 18. 1.

Tanne, in Borgarfirth, Ch. 630.

Tanne Torfason, II. 4. 15.

Tanne (al. Tannr), s. of Þórdís, III. 4. 2.

Teitr Gizorarson (al. Ketilbiarnarson), V. 12. 4.

Teitr Gizorarson byscops, Hv. 2. 19: Io. 4. 5.

Teitr Ísleifsson, V. 14. 2: Gen. B. 10; 15: Mant. 1. 7: Lib. 1. 1;
2. 2; 7. 1; 7. 8; 8. 1; 9. 2: Cr. 10. 1: Hv. 1. 2; 2. 20: Io. 3. 3:
p. 596.

Teitr Ketilbiarnarson, V. (12. 4;) 14. 3; 14. 5: Gen. A. 13-14; B. 7:
Mant. 5. 1: Lib. 7. 1; 305. 9: Hv. 1. 1.

Teitr Oddason, Gm. 606.

Teitr Tyrfingsson, IV. 15. 6.

Teitr Þórbiarnarson, II. 3. 7.

Teitr Þórvallzson, Ch. 635.

Thomas, archbishop of Canterbury, Hv. 5. 13.

Tindr Hallkelsson, II. 2. 1; 6. 4; 7. 2; 13. 1.

Tindr, f. of Herdís, II. 23. 2.

Tinforne Æsoson, II. 16. 1.

Tiorve Baoðvarsson, priest, Hv. 3. 8; 4. 10.



Tiorve enn Háðsame, IV. 7. 2-3.

Tiorve Þórgeirsson Goða, III. 18. 1.

Tiorve Þórkelsson Langs, Gen. A. 31; 34.

Tófa (al. Ióra), m. of Grímr, V. 12. 1.

Tomas Þórarensson, Gm. 612-4.

Torfe Biarnason, priest, p. 640. 39.

Torfe Hamalsson, I. 3. 10.

Torfe Skúmsson, II. 4. 15.

Torfe Valbrannzson, I. 6. 6; 10. 1-2.

Torfe Þórbrannzson, II. 7. 2.

Torfe Þórgeirsson, II. 4. 14.

Torf-Einarr Raognvallzson, Earl of the Orkneys, III. 16. 1; 22. 1:
IV. 14. 2: Gen. B. 7.

Torráðr Osvifsson, II. 9. 3: Gen. B. 3: Cr. 3. 6.

Trandill, see Þórkell Trandill, V. 13. 3.

Trefill, see Þórkell Trefill.

Tryggve, f. of Óláfr Tryggvason, II. 30. 4: III. 20. 2: Gen. B. 5-7:
Mant. 2. 2; 5. 1: Lib. 7. 1, etc.

Tryggve, early king, Cr. 8. 8.

Tungo-Cáre, III. 8. 6.

Tungo-Oddr Onundarson, I. 6. 6; 7. 2; 9. 1; 10. 1-4; 11. 3: II. 2. 5;
4. 9; 15. 11; 15. 14; 26. 2-3: IV. 17. 5: V. 17. 4: Lib. 5. 1.

Tungo-Steinn Biarnarson, III. 8. 4; 11. 4.

Tyrfingr Þórarensson, IV. 15. 6.

Tyrfingr Þóresson, V. 11. 4.

Tyrfingr, s. of Þóríðr (al. Halldórsson), V. 11. 4.




U


Úblauðr, see Óblauðr.

Uðr, see Unnr.

Ugge, f. of Ulfr Uggason, II. 7. 1.

Ulbr = Kveld-Ulbr.

Ulfarr, f. of Hildr (= Ormarr, I. 4. 4); V. 10. 3; 10. 5.

Ulfarr Kappe, II. 11. 1-2; 11. 4: Th. 7. 1; 8. 2.

Ulfarr, a freedman of Þórfinnr í Alftafirðe, II. 11. 4: Th. 8. 2.

Ulfarr Ulfsson, I. 10. 1.

Ulfeiðr Eyjolfsdótter, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 4.

Ulfeiðr Ingiallzdótter, III. 14. 10.

Ulfheðinn Brúnason, III. 12. 4.

Ulfheðinn Gunnarsson, Laog-saogomaðr, Lib. 3. 2; 5. 3; 10. 7:
Hv. 2. 20: p. 641. 43.

Ulfheðinn Véfroeðarson, III. 6. 3.

Ulfheðinn á Víðe-mýre, II. 20. 8.

Ulfhildr Nafar-Helgadótter, III. 12. 2.

Ulfhildr, d. of Þóra Moshals (Hallzdótter), III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5:
Mant. 5. 1.

Ulfkell, a thrall of Ingimundr enn Gamle, III. 5. 2.

Ulfliótr the Lawgiver, I. 4. 3: III. 15. 7: IV. 13. 1-2: Gen. B. 16:
Lib. 2. 2-3; 3. 1; 3. 4.

Ulfliótr of Langaholt, III. 7. 3.

Ulfr, f. of Ásgeirr Ulfsson, V. 14. 7: Gen. A. 14.

Ulfr Fitjom-skegge Þóresson, I. 10. 1.

Ulfr Grímsson ens Háleyska, I. 8. 2; 11. 1.

Ulfr Gylðer, V. 8. 1.

Ulfr Heðinsson, III. 15. 2.

Ulfr frá Hóle, V. 16. 1.

Ulfr enn Hvasse, V. 9. 5.

Ulfr Kráka Hreiðarsson, II. 7. 1; 12. 2; 26. 1.

Ulfr enn Óarge of Hrafnista, I. 8. 1.

Ulfr Orgoðe Iaorundarson, V. 6. 2; 8. 7; 9. 12: Gen. A. 1-2: Cr. 6. 1.

Ulfr Rauðsson, I. 10. 5.

Ulfr enn Skiálge Haognason ens Hvíta, II. 17. 1; 17. 3; 19. 1; 19. 4;
22. 5: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 38; B. 12.

Ulfr under Skratta-felle, III. 18. 3.

Ulfr Uggason, II. 7. 1: Cr. 4. 4.

Ulfr Úspaksson Stallare, II. 9. 3; 23. 2; 24. 1.

Ulfr víkingr í Ulfs-daolom, III. 12. 5.

Ulfr enn Vorske (Vorsa-Ulfr), IV. 14. 7-8.

Ulfr Yxna-Þóresson, II. 12. 1; 28. 3.

Ulfrún einsetukona, Gm. 610.

Ulfrún en Úborna, d. of Eadmund, King of the English, I. 4. 2.

Una Steinolfsdótter, V. 13. 1.

Une enn Danske (enn Úborne) Garðarsson, I. 2. 2: IV. 5. 2; 7. 1-2:
Gen. 5.

Une í Unaðs-dale, III. 5. 12; 11. 3.

Unnr Álfsdótter, II. 5. 4.

Unnr Eyvindardótter, see Auðr.

Unnr Hákonardótter, I. 7. 7.

Unnr Marðardótter Gígjo, V. 6. 2: Gen. A. 1; 3; 5.

Unnr Sigmundardótter, V. 4. 7.

Unnr Snorradótter Goða, Gen. B. 13.

Unnr Þóresdótter, II. 6. 4.

Unnr Þórsteinsdótter Rauðs (?), Th. 7. 4.

Úspakr, see Óspakr.

Útryggr, see Ótryggr.




V


Vaðe Óláfsson Tvennumbrúna, V. 12. 3.

Valbiaorg, m. of Valgerðr, Gen. A. 32.

Valbrandr Eyvindarson, II. 24. 8; 26. 1.

Valbrandr Valþiófsson, I. 6. 6; 9. 1; 10. 1.

Valdemarr, King of Denmark, Þorl. 15. 1: Pol. 3. 4.

Valdís, wife of Bishop John, Io. 12. 1.

Valdís Hreinsdótter ábóta, p. 641. 11.

Valdís Iólgeirsdótter, V. 4. 3.

Vale enn Sterke, II. 5. 9; 7. 1; 8. 3.

Valgarðr Iaorundarson at Hofe, V. 4. 7 n.; 6. 2: Gen. A. 1: Cr. 1. 2.

Valgarðr Vémundarson, V. 3. 1.

Valgarðr Ævarsson, Gen. A. 1   (= Valgarðr Vemundarson).

Valgerðr Bárðardótter, V. 15. 2.

Valgerðr Erlendsdótter, pp. 639. 10; 640. 10; 641. 17.

Valgerðr Flosadótter, Mant. 5. 1: p. 640. 4, 5, &c.

Valgerðr Gestzdótter, V. 13. 5.

Valgerðr Hafliðadótter, Mant. 1. 7.

Valgerðr Ketilsdótter, p. 639. 7.

Valgerðr Markúsdótter, IV. 14. 4n.: p. 640. 48.

Valgerðr Rafnsdótter, p. 639, 4.

Valgerðr Rúnolfsdótter, m. of Eyjolfr Valgerðarson, III. 15. 12;
19. 3-4: V. 17. 4: Gen. A. 32 : Mant. 3. 1: p. 642. 3.

Valgerðr Skúladótter, II. 7. 2.

Valgerðr Viðarsdótter, II. 7. 2.

Valgerðr Þórbrannzdótter (al. Þróndardótter) Ásbrannzsonar, Gen. A. 11.

Valgerðr Þórbrannzdótter at Olfusvatne, II. 7. 2.

Valgerðr Þórgilsdótter, II. 6. 4.

Valgerðr Þórgilsdótter Arasonar, Gen. B. 14.

Valgerðr Þóroddzdótter Draópo-stúfs, III. 1. 2.

Valla-Brandr, s. of Aldís (al. Ásdís) Ófeigsdótter, V. 3. 7; 4. 5;
9. 1; 13. 2.

Valla-Liótr Liótolfsson Goða, III. 20. 1.

Vallverjar, V. 9. 5.

Valr (al. Vali) Loðmundarson, IV. 16. 1; 19. 1.

Valþiófr, f. of Geirþiófr, II. 22. 5.

Valþiófr Hrólfsson, III. 15. 10.

Valþiófr OErlygsson enn Gamle, I. 6. 4; 6. 6; 10. 1; 11. 2: II. 7. 1;
20. 6.

Valþiófr á Valþiófsstaoðom, II. 12. 1.

Valþyflinga-kyn, I. 6. 6.

Vandráðr Osvifsson, Gen. B. 3: Cr. 3. 6.

Vanlande, early king, Lib. 306. 5.

Vápnfirðingar, IV. 3. 2.

Vatnarr Víkarsson, Norwegian king, Mant. 5. 3-4.

Vatzfirðingar, II. 15. 9 b: Gen. B. 2; 13.

Vébiaorn Sygna-kappe (Sygna-trauste) Végeirsson, II. 22. 7; 24. 6;
25. 1-2; 26. 5: III. 12. 8.

Vébrandr Ásbrannzson, V. 13. 6.

Vébrandr Hróarsson Tungo-Goða, IV. 18. 1.

Veðrar-Grímr Ásason hersis, II. 14. 3; 15. 9.

Veðrar-Grímr herser í Sogne, I. 4. 1: Gen. A. 13-14; 25; 32; 35;
B. 7: Th. 1. 1.

Védís Snartardótter, see Iódís.

Védís Végeirsdótter, II. 24. 6; 25. 1-2; 26. 5.

Védís (al. Valdís) Þórbrannzdótter, III. 20. 3.

Veðormr Ásbiarnarson, IV. 15. 3.

Vefroeðr Ævarsson, III. 5. 15; 6. 1-3; 8. 1.

Végeirr í Sogne, II. 22. 3; 22. 7; 25. 1: III. 12. 8.

Végestr Biartmársson, II. 22. 3.

Végestr Biartmársson (another), II. 22. 3-4.

Végestr Végeirsson, II. 25. 1.

Vékell enn Hamramme, III. 7. 8.

Vélaug, wife of Biaorn Buna, I. 4. 1.

Vélaug OErlygsdótter, I. 6. 4: II. 2. 1; 3. 1.

Vélaug Víkingsdótter, Mant. 5. 5.

Véleifr enn Gamle Þórgeirsson, I. 9. 2: II. 4. 3; 15. 9; 30. 1.

Véleifr, f. of Þórolfr (= Véleifr enn Gamle?), III. 22. 3.

Vémundr í Fáskrúðs-firðe, IV. 10. 8.

Vémundr enn Gamle Víkingsson, I. 4. 1: IV. 4. 2: V. 10. 4; 15. 1:
Mant. 5. 5.

Vémundr Hrólfsson Hoeggvanda, IV. 17. 1.

Vémundr Kogor Þóresson, III. 17. 2.

Vémundr Loðmundarson, IV. 19. 3.

Vémundr Orðlo-kar Þórolfsson, V. 3. 1: Gen. A. 1; B. 16 (Iarðlokar).

Vémundr, f. of Skioldolfr and Berðlo-Káre, IV. 3. 6.

Vémundr Smiðr Sigmundarson Cleykess, IV. 17. 2.

Vémundr Végeirsson, II. 25. 1.

Véný Þórsteinsdótter Oddleifssonar, II. 21. 1.

Vermundr enn Mióve Þórgrímsson, II. 7. 6; 7. 8; 9. 4; 11. 7; 15. 9 b;
23. 2: Gen. B. 2; 10 (Vémundr); 13.

Vermundr Þengilsson, III. 16. 2.

Vestarr Hoengsson, V. 4. 5; 4. 7.

Vestarr Óleifsson, IV. 16. 2.

Vestarr, f. of Þórgeirr, IV. 5. 1.

Vestarr Þórolfsson Bloðro-skalla, II. 8. 1; 17. 6; 20. 9; Th. 7. 2.

Vésteinn Végeirsson, II. 22. 3; 7-8; 23. 1;  25. 1.

Vésteinn Vésteinsson, II. 22. 3; 22. 7; 23. 1: p. 319. 6.

Vestfirðingar, Th. 10. 4: Cr. 8. 10.

Vestliðe Cetilsson, II. 15. 2.

Vestmaðr, b. of Vémundr, III. 22. 1.

Vestmarr í Reykjar-dal, III. 18. 3.

Vestmarr Þórsteinsson ens Skialga, IV. 14. 9.

Vetrliðe Arinbiarnarson, IV. 8. 1.

Vetrliðe Skáld Sumarliðason, V. 4. 6-7: Cr. 4. 4.

Véþormr Végeirsson, II. 25. 1.

Véþormr Vémundarson, IV. 4. 2: V. 15. 1.

Véþaorn Végeirsson, II. 25. 1.

Viðarr Hrólfsson, III. 15. 10.

Viðarr, f. of Valgerðr, II. 7. 3.

Víðcunnr Ioansson, Gen. B. 13.

Viðfirðingar, IV. 10. 4.

Vífill (Vívill) Ketilsson, a freedman of Auðr diúpauðga, II. 4. 13;
6. 5; 12. 2; 15. 4.

Vífill á Vífils-toftom, II. 16. 1.

Vífill, a thrall of Ingolfr Arnarson, I. 3. 7-8.

Víga-Barðe Goðmundarson, II. 15. 9 b: III. 6. 6: Gen. B. 2; 13.

Víga-Biarne, see Biarne Brodd-Helgason, IV. 3. 1: Mant. 5. 6: Cr. 1. 2.

Víga-Glúmr Eyjolfsson, III. 9. 2; 14. 4; 14. 20; 21. 2: Mant. 5. 1:
Cr. 1. 2.

Víga-Hrappr, see Hrappr Helgason.

Víga-Scúta Áskelsson, III. 19. 1; 19. 4: IV. 14. 10.

Víga-Sturla Þióðreksson, II. 18. 2; 20.  2; 23. 2; 28. 1: Gen. B. 13:
Mant. 1. 7.

Víga-Styrr Þórgrímsson, II. 7. 5-6; 9. 4; 12. 2; 15. 1; 15. 8:
Cr. 1. 2.

Vígbiodr Baoðmóðsson, II. 4. 14; 11. 8.

Vígdís Ásólfsdótter Flosa, II. 15. 13.

Vígdís Auðunnardótter Rotins, III. 15. 8.

Vígdís Bárðardótter, II. 7. 2.

Vígdís Conalsdótter, III. 18. 3; 19. 4.

Vígdís Geirsdótter, p. 641. 5.

Vígdís, w. of Ingimundr iarl, III. 5. 1.

Vígdís Óláfsdótter, Thorv. 5.

Vígdís Óleifsdótter Feilans, II. 15. 14.

Vígdís Steinsdótter Danska, II. 20. 9.

Vígdís Svertingsdótter, II. 20. 2: Gen. 1: p. 640. 32.

Vígdís Þórarensdótter Fylsennis, I. 9. 4: II. 15. 14; 18. 1.

Vígdís Þórarensdótter Ragabróður, II. 15. 14.

Vígdís Þóresdótter Þegjanda, III. 5. 2-3.

Vígdís Þóresdótter Hámundarsonar, III. 15. 6; 21. 2.

Vígdís Þórsteinsdótter Rauðs, II. 14. 1; 15. 11.

Vígdís [Þórgils ?]dótter, II. 20. 9.

Vígfúss Biarnarson í Drápuhlíð, II. 9. 3: Th. 7. 3; 8. 3.

Vígfúss Eyjolfsson, III. 14. 4; 21. 1.

Vígfúss Gunnsteinsson, Gen. B. 10.

Vígfúss í Hlíð, see Sigfúss.

Vigfúss Sigurðarson, Gen. B. 6.

Vígfúss Víga-Glúmsson, III. 14. 4: Mant. 5. 1.

Vígfúss Víkinga-Kárason, III. 14. 4: Mant. 5. 1.

Vígsterkr, f. of Baoðvar, II. 20. 3; 27. 1.

Víkarr Harallzson, Norwegian king, Mant. 5. 3.

Víkinga-Káre Sigurðarson Bióða-skalla, III. 14. 4: V. 14. 5:
Gen. A. 13-17: B. 6 (Eymundarson Askaspilles), 7: Mant. 5. 1: Cr. 7. 1.

Víkingr Skáneyjar-skelmer, V. 10. 4.

Víkingr (Haraldr enn Hárfagre ?), f. of Þórðr and Onundr, II. 20. 8;
23. 2; 24. 4: V. 17. 2.

*Vilbaldr Dufþacsson (al. Dofnialsson), IV. 17. 5; 18. 3.

Vilbaldus, Count of Bremen, Cr. 3. 1.

Vilborg Arnoddzdótter, III. 12. 6.

Vilborg Gizorardótter, I. 11. 2: Hv. 1. 1.

Vilborg Iódísardótter, pp. 641. 1, 8; 642. 37, 43.

Vilborg, d. of King Ósvaldr, I. 4. 2.

Vilgeirr Biarnarson Austræna, II. 9. 3.

Vilgerðr Haorða-Káradótter, I. 2. 3: III. 11. 5.

Vilgeirr Óttarsson, Th. 7. 3.

Vilhialmr I and II, Kings of England, Hv. 2. 20.

Vilmundr, abbot, Io. 12. 5: p. 592.

Visburr, early king, Lib. 306. 6.

Vívill, see Vífill.

Vaolo-Steinn, son Þórríðar Sundafylles, II. 18. 3; 24. 2; 24. 5.

Vorsar, IV. 14. 7.

Væpnlingar, IV. 11. 3.




Y


Yngvarr, early king, Lib. 306. 9.

Yngvarr, f. of Bera, II. 4. 1; 4. 12; 20. 5.

Yngve, King of the Turks, Lib. 306. 4 and 7.

Yngvildr Álfsdótter, Gen. B. 11.

Yngvildr Allra-syster Hámundardótter Heljar-skinnz, III. 14. 15; 15. 9.

Yngvildr Atladótter, II. 18. 1: Gen. B. 9.

Yngvildr Auðolfsdótter, III. 14. 19.

Yngvildr Biarnadótter, IV. 3. 1.

Yngvildr Gunnarsdótter, III. 15. 7.

Yngvildr Hallzdótter, p. 641. 29.

Yngvildr Hauksdótter, Gen. B. 10.

Yngvildr Ketilsdóttir, I. 4. 5: II. 9. 1: III. 13. 3: Th. 1. 1.

Yngvildr Narfadótter, Gen. B. 10: p. 642. 10.

Yngvildr Ormsdótter, Cr. 1. 5.

Yngvildr Rauðkinn Ásgeirsdótter, III. 14. 6.

Yngvildr Síðo-Hallzdótter, III. 21. 2: IV. 14. 4n.: Gen. B. 10; 15.

Yngvildr Steingrímsdótter, see Yngvildr Þorgrímsdótter.

Yngvildr Steinroeðardótter, III. 6. 6.

Yngvildr Vermundardótter, Gen. B. 10.

Yngvildr Þórðardótter, Gen. B. 10.

Yngvildr Þórgeirsdótter, w. of Þórgeirr Eiríksson, III. 8. 1.

Yngvildr Þórgeirsdótter Vífilssonar, II. 6. 5; 15. 4.

Yngvildr Þórgrímsdótter Digr-Ketilssonar, IV. 14. 4.

Yngvildr Þórgrímsdótter Eyjolfssonar, II. 20. 8.

Yngvildr Þórkelsdótter Fullspaks (= Yngvildr Ævarsdótter ?),
Gen. A. 27.

Yngvildr Ævarsdótter ens Gamla, IV. 8. 1: p. 642. 49.

Yxna-Þórer, I. 2. 2: II. 12. 1; 28. 3: III. 8. 2; 14. 20-21: IV. 3. 1:
Gen. A. 28; B. 3: Mant. 5. 6.

Ýr Geirmundardótter, I. 11. 4: II. 17. 6; 20. 2; 20. 4; 20. 6; 27. 1:
Gen. B. 2; 8: Mant. 277.




Þ


Þangbrandr, the priest, V. 4. 6: Lib. 7. 1; 9. 9: Cr. 3. 1.

Þengill Miok-siglande, III. 16. 2.

Þiðrande, f. of Eirný, II. 18. 1.

Þiðrande Geitesson, Gen. A. 19.

Þiðrande Ketilsson (enn Spake), IV. 4. 2; 8. 1; 12. 2; 14. 4:
Gen. A. 19; 27.

Þiðrande Síðo-Hallzson, Gen. A. 19: pp. 418-9.

Þióðarr Friðleifsson, III. 11. 4.

Þióðgerðr Coðransdótter, III. 11. 5.

Þióðgerðr Flókadótter, III. 11. 5.

Þióðhildr Eyvindardótter Austmannz, II. 23. 2.

Þióðhildr Iaorundardótter, II. 12. 1; 19. 4.

Þióðhildr Þórkelsdótter Fullspaks, IV. 8. 1.

Þióðolfr (al. Þórolfr) enn Fróðe, III. 20. 1.

Þióðolfr Goðe Eilífsson Arnar, III. 6. 6.

Þióðolfr or Haofn, II. 9. 3: Gen. B. 3 (enn Láge).

Þióðolfr or Hvíne, Mant. 5. 4.

Þióðolfr Karlason, II. 1. 2.

Þióðrekr í Bero-firðe, IV. 11. 6.

Þióðrekr Sleito-Biarnarson, II. 18. 2-3; 23. 2; 24. 1; 28. 1:
Gen. B. 13.

Þióðrekr Þióðreksson, II. 18. 2; 28. 1.

Þiórsdoeler, III. 22. 4.

Þióstarr á Alftanese, I. 7. 1; 11. 3: II. 17. 6; 20. 6: IV. 17. 4:
V. 7. 2: Gen. B. 8.

Þióstólfr Biarnarson, I. 6. 4; 9. 1.

Þóra Biarnardótter Enska, II. 22. 6.

Þóra Borgar-hiaortr Herraðardótter, Gen. B. 5: Mant. 5. 1.

Þóra Eyjolfsdótter (al. Nesia-Cniúcs d.), II. 20. 8; 23. 2.

Þóra Gísladótter, II. 23. 2.

Þóra Guðmundardótter Gríss, II. 22. 6.

Þóra, m. of Guðmundr Gríss, II. 22. 6.

Þóra (al. Þóríðr) Gunnsteinsdótter, II. 22. 5.

Þóra Harallzdótter Gollskeggs, V. II. 1: Mant. 5. 2.

Þóra Helgadótter ens Magra, III. 15. 7: Gen. B. 16.

Þóra Haorða-Káradótter, I. 4. 3: IV. 13. 1: Gen. B. 16.

Þóra Hrólfsdótter Rauðskeggs, V. 7. 9.

Þóra Magnússdótter Berfoetts, Pol. 1. 1; p. 640. 12.

Þóra Mosháls Auðunnardótter, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5: Mant. 5. 1.

Þóra Óleifsdótter Feilans, II. 10. 5; 15. 14: Gen. A. 36: Th. 9. 1;
11. 3-4.

Þóra Olvesdótter, V. 11. 2.

Þóra Pólsdótter, Pol. 1. 8; 9. 2; 10. 1.

Þóra Sigurðardótter Orms-í-Auga, Gen. A. 35-6; B. 12: Th. 1. 4.

Þóra Snorradótter Goða, Gen. B. 13.

Þóra Steinsdótter Brandaxsonar, IV. 9. 5; 19. 2-3.

Þóra Vestarsdótter af Eyre, II. 20. 9.

Þóra, w. of Þórkell Ásgeirsson, I. 5. 1.

Þóra Þórsteinsdótter Holmunz, IV. 9. 5; 19. 2.

Þóra Þórsteinsdótter ens Hvíta, IV. 3. 1.

Þóralfr enn Sterke Þórgeirsson, III. 14. 16.

Þórarenn Ásbiarnarson Loðinhaofða, IV. 5. 4: Cr. 8. 7.

Þórarenn Atlason ens Ramma, III. 6. 6.

Þórarenn Blinde Þórvarðzson, I. 8. 3.

Þórarenn Baoðmóðsson, V. 16. 7.

Þórarenn Brannzson, Gen. B. 14.

Þórarenn bryte á Hólom, Gm. 609.

Þórarenn Colsson, II. 8. 2.

Þórarenn Corne Grímkelsson, II. 7. 1.

Þórarenn Dagsson, III. 21. 2.

Þórarenn Egilsson, IV. 2. 2.

Þórarenn Erlingsson, V. 16. 10.

Þórarenn Falkason, p. 642. 1.

Þórarenn Finnason, IV. 1. 2.

Þórarenn Fylsenne Þórðarson, II. 15. 14; 18. 1: Cr. 2. 2.

Þórarenn Giallande, II. 18. 3.

Þórarenn Glúmsson, I. 6. 5; 10. 4.

Þórarenn Goðe Þórgilsson Giallande, III. 4. 1.

Þórarenn Hafrsson, III. 12. 1.

Þórarenn Hallkelsson, II. 2. 1.

Þórarenn enn Illi Steinolfsson, I. 11. 3: III. 14. 4.

Þórarenn Ingiallzson, II. 17. 4: III. 21. 3.

Þórarenn Krókr, II. 18. 5.

Þórarenn, foster-son of Liótr enn Spake, II. 24. 2.

Þórarenn Nefjulfsson, Cr. 6. 3; 6. B*.

Þórarenn Olvesson, IV. 18. 3; 18. 6.

Þórarenn Ozorarson, V. 16. 12.

Þórarenn Ragabróðer Áleifsson, I. 9. 4: II. 15. 14: Gen. A. 18; B. 1:
Lib. 3. 5; 5. 4; 10. 2.

Þórarenn Skeggjason, Lib. 10. 2.

Þórarenn Roste Há-Snorrason, II. 29. 3.

Þórarenn Smiðkelsson, II. 2. 2.

Þórarenn enn Spake Þórvallzson, III. 6. 4.

Þórarenn, f. of Steinn at Rauðamel, II. 15. 14.

Þórarenn enn Svarte Þórólfsson Máfhlíðingr, II. 7. 5-6; 7. 8; 11. 5:
Th. 8. 3.

Þórarenn Sælingr Þóresson, IV. 3. 1.

Þórarenn Þórbiarnarson, V. 12. 1.

Þórarenn Þóresson á Espihóle, III. 15. 6.

Þórarenn Þórgeirsson, II. 5. 14.

Þórarenn Þórgilsson ok Þóreyjar Gestzdóttur, II. 21. 1.

Þórarenn Þórgilsson at Búrfelle, II. 21. 1: V. 15. 1.

Þórarenn Þórgilsson Cnappa, II. 4. 15.

Þórarenn Þórkelsson, V. 10. 6.

Þórarenn Þórkelsson Skota-Collz, V. 13. 4: Hv. 3. 1.

Þórarenn Þórsteinsson Surtz, II. 20. 1.

Þórarna Ásgeirsdótter, II. 15. 7.

Þórarna Ingolfsdótter, II. 21. 4.

Þórarna Ketilsdótter Ilbreiðs, II. 17. 4; 18. 6; 21. 6.

Þórarna Sigvatzdótter (al. Sigmundardótter), V. 16. 10.

Þórarna Þóroddzdótter Hialms, III. 11. 2.

Þórarna Þróndardótter Mióbeins, II. 18. 7: III. 15. 10.

Þórbeiner á Þórbeinesstaoðom, Th. 8. 3.

Þórbergr Corna-múle Þórkelsson, I. 10. 7: III. 2. 3: V. 3. 4.

Þórbergr Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

Þórbergr í Langa-dal, II. 11. 7-8 (13. 1 called Hróarr).

Þórbergr Óleifsson, II. 15. 9.

Þórbergr Þórvallzson Holbarka, IV. 5. 4.

Þórbiaorg Boejar-bót Ásgeirsdótter, III. 4. 1.

Þórbiaorg Catla Helgadótter Skarfs, I. 6. 8: II. 21. 1.

Þórbiaorg Colbrún Glúmsdótter, II. 20. 8.

Þórbiaorg Digra Óleifsdótter, II. 15. 9: Gen. B. 2.

Þórbiaorg Hákonardótter, IV. 3. 5.

Þórbiaorg Holmasól Helgadótter ens Magra, III. 14. 3; 15. 3; 20. 1.

Þórbiaorg  Hrólfsdótter, s. of Steinolfr enn Láge, II. 19. 1.

Þórbiaorg Ketilsdótter ens Fíflska,  IV. 16. 1.

Þórbiaorg Knarrar-bringa Gilsdótter Skeiðar-nefs, II. 12. 1; 18. 7;
19. 4.

Þórbiaorg, w. of Loptr Byscopsson, IV. 5. 2.

Þórbiaorg, d. of Miðfiarðar-Skegge, II. 2. 4; 15. 3: III. 2. 3.

Þórbiaorg Onundardótter, III. 20. 5.

Þórbiaorg Staong, II. 4. 7.

Þórbiaorg Svertingsdótter, IV. 17. 4.

Þórbiaorg, m. of Þórðr Illoge the younger, IV. 14. 10.

Þórbiaorg Þórsteinsdótter ens Hvíta, IV. 3. 1.

Þórbiaorg Þórfinnzdótter, II. 11. 3.

Þórbiaorn, f. of Arnmóðr enn Rauðe, II. 21. 3.

Þórbiaorn Arnbiarnarson, II. 3. 7; 8. 2.

Þórbiaorn Arngrímsson á Framnese, V. 11. 3.

Þórbiaorn Arnmóðarson  ens Rauða, II. 21. 3.

Þórbiaorn Arnórsson Hýnefs, III. 1. 2.

Þórbiaorn Arnþiófsson, V, 16. 10.

Þórbiaorn Bitra, II. 29. 5.

Þórbiaorn, f. of Bitro-Odde (cf. Þórvaldr Orgoðe), Gen. B. 11.

Þórbiaorn Blese of Blesa-staðer, II. 3. 8.

Þórbiaorn Brúnason at Steinom, II. 3. 9.

Þórbiaorn Colcan, III. 5. 17.

Þórbiaorn Collr Valþiófsson, I. 6. 6.

Þórbiaorn Crumr of Crums-hólar, II. 4. 6.

Þórbiaorn Crumr Gnúpa-Bárðarson, IV. 15. 5.

Þórbiaorn enn Digre Ormsson ens Mióva, II. 7. 2; 7. 5-6; 22. 8.

Þórbiaorn Einarsson, II. 15. 2.

Þórbiaorn Eyvindarson Vápna, IV. 2. 1.

Þórbiaorn enn Gaulverske Ormarsson, I. 4. 4: V. 6. 2; 9. 1; 10. 1-3.

Þórbiaorn Geirmundarson, V. 2. 2.

Þórbiaorn Glora, II. 12. 9.

Þórbiaorn Graut-Atlason, IV. 4. 3; 5. 4.

Þórbiaorn enn Haukdoelske Biarnarson, II. 12. 1 (= Þórbiaorn at
Vatne?).

Þórbiaorn Hraðason, I. 7. 8.

Þórbiaorn Iarla-kappe, V. 13. 2; 13. 5.

Þórbiaorn Ísroeðarson, II. 3. 3.

Þórbiaorn enn Kvirre Ófeigsson, V. 3. 4.

Þórbiaorn Laxa-karl, V. 13. 1-3.

Þórbiaorn Loke Baoðmóðsson, II. 20. 2.

Þórbiaorn Narfason, Gen. B. 10.

Þórbiaorn Oddason, p. 641. 31.

Þórbiaorn Ongull Þórðarson, III. 11. 2: Gen. B. 5.

Þórbiaorn Osvifsson, II. 9. 3.

Þórbiaorn Ozorarson, V. 12. 1.

Þórbiaorn Scuma Baoðvarsson, I. 6. 2: II. 21. 5.

Þórbiaorn Skagason, III. 15. 12: Cr. 2. 4.

Þórbiaorn Skage, III. 19. 4.

Þórbiaorn Skialda-Biarnarson, II. 18. 2; 28. 1.

Þórbiaorn Skrofuðr Ceallacsson, II. 16. 1.

Þórbiaorn Spaorr Baoðvarsson, I. 6. 2 (= Þórolfr Spaorr ?).

Þórbiaorn enn Sterke, II. 26. 4.

Þórbiaorn Strúgr Ævarsson, III. 6. 1-2.

Þórbiaorn Súrr, II. 7. 5; 17. 4; 22. 7: Gen. A. 36.

Þórbiaorn Svarte, I. 8. 3.

Þórbiaorn Talcne Baoðvarsson, I. 6. 2: II. 18. 6; 21. 5-6.

Þórbiaorn Tyrfingsson, the priest, V. II. 4.

Þórbiaorn at Vatne, II. 15. 8; 15. 9   (= Þórbiaorn enn Haukdælske
Biarnarson ?).

Þórbiaorn Vífilsson, II. 4. 13; 6. 4; 12. 2; 15. 4.

Þórbiaorn Þióðreksson, II. 18. 2; 23. 2; 24. 1-2; 26. 1; 28. 1.

Þórbiaorn Þiótr, III. 12. 8.

Þórbiaorn Þórkelsson, Cr. 6. 1.

Þórbiaorn Þórvallzson, II. 7. 2.

Þórbiaorn Þynna Hrómundarson, II. 30. 3-4: III. 5. 16.

Þórbrandr Ásbrannzson, Gen. A. 11.

Þórbrandr í Alftafirðe Þórfinnzson (al. Vébrandzson), II. 8. 1; 11. 3;
11. 6; 12. 2: Th. 7. 1; 8. 2; 9. 3.

Þórbrandr í Daolom, III. 6. 5.

Þórbrandr Harallzson, III. 3. 1.

Þórbrandr at Olfusvatne, II. 7. 2.

Þórbrandr Orrecr, III. 8. 7.

Þórbrandr at Rauða-skriðo, f. of Védís and Hallgils, III. 20. 3; 20. 5.

Þórbrandr í Skarfa-nese, III. 11. 2.

Þórbrandr Þórbiarnarson ens Óarga, V. 13. 6.

Þórdís, d. of Arnkatla, IV. 19. 4.

Þórdís Biarnardótter, III. 11. 2.

Þórdís Bótolfsdótter, pp. 640. 35; 641. 5, &c.

Þórdís Caðalsdótter, III. 15. 6.

Þórdís Einarsdótter, II. 15. 2.

Þórdís, Eyversk kona, Hv. 1. 1.

Þórdís Flosadótter, p. 640. 8, 21.

Þórdís Goðlaugsdótter, II. 5. 8; 15. 10; 20. 2.

Þórdís Goðmundardótter ens Ríka, Gen. A. 26.

Þórdís Halldórsdótter, w. of Skald-Helge, III. 2. 3.

Þórdís Helgadótter Skarfs (al. Skrafs), II. 21. 1.

Þórdís Iarlsdótter, see Þórdís Raognvallzdótter.

Þórdís, d. of Ióra, II. 4. 2.

Þórdís Ingimundardótter ens Gamla, III. 5. 2-3; 5. 10.

Þórdís en Mikla Þórgeirsdótter, V. 9. 2; 9. 7.

Þórdís (al. Þórríðr) Óleifsdótter Feilans, I. 9. 4: II. 15. 14.

Þórdís Ozorardótter Keileselgs, IV. 12. 2; 14. 4: Gen. A. 19; B. 10:
Lib. 305. 12.

Þórdís Raognvallzdótter Mæra-iarls, IV. 14. 10.

Þórdís Síðo-Hallzdótter, Gen. B. 15.

Þórdís Snorradótter Goða, Gen. B. 13-14.

Þórdís Snorradótter Iaorundarsonar, II. 23. 2.

Þórdís spákona, Thorv. 1.

Þórdís Súrsdótter, II. 7. 5; 22. 8: Gen. A. 36.

Þórdís Svarthaofðadótter, I. 9. 1: II. 5. 7.

Þórdís Torf-Einarsdótter, III. 22. 1.

Þórdís Yngvarsdótter, II. 4. 12; 20. 5.

Þórdís Þióðolfsdótter, w. of Osvifr Spake, II. 9. 3: Gen. B. 2.

Þórdís Þórbiarnardótter, II. 7. 2.

Þórdís Þórðardótter Illoga, IV. 14. 10.

Þórdís Þórfinnzdótter (= Þóríðr Þórfinnzdótter, II. 4. 3), II. 4. 11.

Þórdís Þórgeirsdótter Suðo, II. 19. 5.

Þórdís Þórhaddzdótter, II. 4. 3; 30. 1.

Þórdís Þórkelsdótter Þialfa, V. 9. 11.

Þórdís Þóroddzdótter, Hv. 1. 1.

Þórdís Þórolfsdótter, II. 4. 1.

Þórdís Þórsteinsdótter Surtz, II. 20. 1.

Þórdís Þórvallzdótter, III. 6. 4.

Þórdís Þórvarðzdótter Síðo-Hallzsonar, IV. 14. 4: Gen. B. 10; 15.

Þórðr Báreksson, V. 5. 2.

Þórðr Barkarson, I. 7. 1.

Þórðr Beigalde, see Þórer B.

Þórðr Bialke, III. 15. 11.

Þórðr Blígr Þórláksson, II. 8. 1; II. 6.

Þórðr Baoðvarsson, priest, Od. 3. 2; 4. 1, &c.: p. 639. 9.

Þórðr Baoðvarsson (grandson of prec.), pp. 639. 9; 640. 49; 641. 6.

Þórðr Brúnason ens Hvíta, III. 12. 4.

Þórðr Conalsson, III. 19. 3-4.

Þórðr Dofne (Domne) Atlason, V. 11. 2; 12. 2.

Þórðr Erra, II. 3. 8.

Þórðr Eyjolfsson, III. 1. 2.

Þórðr Eysteinsson Meinfrets, II. 15. 7; 15. 11: III. 1. 1.

Þórðr Freys-goðe Ozorarson, IV. 15. 3; 18. 1; 18. 6: V. 7. 4:
Gen. A. 10; 25; B. 15: Nj. 364. 5: Cr. 1. 2; 6. 3; 6. B*; 7. 1.

Þórðr Geller Óleifsson Feilans, II. 2. 5; 10. 4-5; 11. 7-8; 12. 2;
14. 8; 15. 11; 15. 14: III. 2. 3; 11. 2: V. 17. 4: Gen. A. 37; B. 1;
4: Th. 9. 1; 10. 1-4: Lib. 5. 1-2; 305. 17; 306. 17.

Þórðr Gestzson Oddleifssonar, II. 21. 1.

Þórðr Gilsson, f. of Hvamm-Sturla, II. 5. 8; 15. 9 b-10; 20. 2; 23. 2:
Gen. B. 2; 10: Cr. 10. 10.

Þórðr Gizorarson, Hv. 2. 19.

Þórðr Gnúpa Oddzson, II. 5. 6.

Þórðr Hafliðason, Mant. 1. 7.

Þórðr Halldórsson, Gen. B. 15.

Þórðr Halme (? = Þórðr Þvare), IV. 3. 3.

Þórðr Helgason, II. 3. 4.

Þórðr Hesthaofðe Snorrason, III. 11. 2: Lib. 305. 17.

Þórðr Hialtason, III. 10. 1-2.

Þórðr frá Haofða, see Haofða-Þórðr.

Þórðr Hísinga-skalle (Hreða) Haorða-Kárason, Gen. B. 15-16.

Þórðr Hvíte (or Orvond) Þórvallzson, II. 23. 2.

Þórðr Illoge Eyvindarson, IV. 14. 4; 14. 10(= Illoge Fellz-goðe).

Þórðr Illoge Þóresson Flatnefs (Þórðr Illoge the younger), IV. 14. 10.

Þórðr Ingunnarson (s. of Glúmr Geirason), II. 15. 8: III. 21. 3.

Þórðr Kause Snorrason Goða, Gen. B. 13.

Þórðr Knappr, III. 12. 1.

Þórðr Kaottr Þórðarson, II. 9. 3; 15. 8.

Þórðr Kráko-nef, II. 21. 1: Gen. B. 10.

Þórðr Lambe, I. 6. 6.

Þórðr Leggjalde Molda-Gnúpsson, IV. 17. 3.

Þórðr Leysingjason, Gen. A. 9.

Þórðr Magnússon, pp. 639. 1; 640. 28.

Þórðr Mikill Ævarsson, III. 6. 1-2.

Þórðr í Múla, s. of Arndís Auðga, II. 18. 1; 30. 2: Gen. B. 9.

Þórðr Narfason, Gen. B. 10.

Þórðr Oddleifsson, II. 23. 2: Gen. B. 10.

Þórðr Ornolfsson, III. 14. 15.

Þórðr Orvond Þórvallzson, II. 23. 2.

Þórðr Rafnsson at Stockahlaoðom, III. 16. 1.

Þórðr Skáld Colbeinsson, II. 5. 4; 15. 11.

Þórðr Skapl, III. 9. 2; 10. 1.

Þórðr Skatason, II. 15. 7.

Þórðr Skegge Hrappsson, I. 4. 2-4: III. 8. 1: IV. 13. 1: V. 14. 1:
Gen. A. 13-14; B. 7.

Þórðr Skúlason, pp. 639. 8; 641. 16.

Þórðr Slítande, III. 14. 15-16.

Þórðr Snorrason, Pol. 15. 2.

Þórðr Solvason Þórðarsonar, pp. 639. 1; 640. 28.

Þórðr Solvason Hrólfssonar of Reykjaholt, I. 11. 2: II. 17. 6:
Cr. 10. 8: Hv. 4. 1.

Þórðr Steinolfsson, II. 22. 6.

Þórðr Sturluson Þióðrekssonar, II. 23. 2: Gen. B. 13: Mant. 1. 7.

Þórðr Sturluson í Hvamme, Gen. B. 10: pp. 639. 2; 640. 40.

Þórðr Vagg-agðe, V. 15. 1.

Þórðr Valgerðarson, p. 639. 7.

Þórðr Vermundarson, Gm. 610-13.

Þórðr Vífilsson, II. 16. 2.

Þórðr Víkingsson, II. 20. 8; 23. 2; 24. 4: V. 17. 2.

Þórðr, f. of Yngvildr, Gen. B. 10.

Þórðr Þórgeirsson Þórðarsonar, III. 15. 11.

Þórðr Þórgeirsson Cengs, II. 11. 5.

Þórðr Þórgeirsson Lamba, II. 4. 12; 20. 5.

Þórðr Þórkelsson, II. 22. 6.

Þórðr Þórsteinsson, II. 21. 1.

Þórðr Þórsteinsson ens Hvíta, IV. 3. 1.

Þórðr Þórvallzson í Vatz-firðe, II. 15. 9 b: III. 6. 4: Gen. B. 2:
Mant. 1. 7.

Þórðr (al. Þórer) Þurs, II. 4. 7.

Þórðr Þvare Þórolfsson Halma, IV. 3. 7.

Þórðr Þvare Þórólfsson Þórðarsonar, IV. 3. 7.

Þórelfr Alfsdótter, II. 15. 11.

Þórer, archbishop in Norway, Pol. 3. 3; 13. 2-3.

Þórer Ásason, V. 11. 4.

Þórer (al. Þórðr) Beigalde, II. 4. 6.

Þórer Brannzson, V. 16. 2.

Þórer Broddason, Hv. 2. 1.

Þórer Croppinskegge, Lib. 3. 2.

Þórer Drífa Óláfsson, V. 12. 3.

Þórer Dúfonef, III. 8. 8-9.

Þórer, f. of Eymundr Askaspiller, Gen. B. 6.

Þórer Goðlaus Ormarsson, I. 4. 4.

Þórer Graut-Atlason, IV. 3. 1; 3. 3; 4. 3: Gen. A. 28.

Þórer Grímsson Gráfeldarmúla, III. 18. 1.

Þórer Grímsson, see Sel-Þórer.

Þórer Gunnlaugsson (al. Ketilsson) í Hefni, I. 8. 1: III. 5. 1.

Þórer Gunnolfsson, III. 12. 8.

Þórer Hafrs-þió Ingimundarson ens Gamla, III. 5. 3; 5. 13.

Þórer Haklangr, III. 5. 2.

Þórer Halldórsson, II. 13. 1.

Þórer Hámundarson Heljarskinns, á Espihóle, III. 14. 10; 15. 6; 21. 2:
Gen. A. 25: Mant. 277.

Þórer Hauknefr, herser, IV. 1. 1.

Þórer Haustmyrkr Vigbiodsson, II. 11. 8: V. 16. 7.

Þórer enn Háve í Crossavík, IV. 10. 5.

Þórer Helgason, III. 15. 10.

Þórer herser Hroallzson, II. 2. 1.

Þórer, s. of Hildr Ásbiarnardótter, IV. 16. 1.

Þórer Hima, III. 11. 1.

Þórer Hlamande, f. of Ulfr Fitjomskegge, I. 10. 1.

Þórer Hrafnkelsson, IV. 6. 3: Gen. A. 30.

Þórer Hundr, Gen. B. 13.

Þórer iarl á Vermalande, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5.

Þórer Kárason Túlkara, Gen. B. 5.

Þórer Keilis-múle Baoðolfsson, III. 15. 3-4.

Þórer Ketilsson, h. of Ástríðr Mannvizbrecka, IV. 7. 3; 18. 2.

Þórer Leðr-hals Þórsteinsson, III. 17. 2; 19. 1.

Þórer Lína í Breiðavík, IV. 8. 3.

Þórer, priest, Pol. 13. 3.

Þórer Refskegg, a thrall of Ingimundr enn Gamle, III. 5. 2.

Þórer Símunarson, Hv. 3. 13.

Þórer Skegg-Broddason, IV. 3. 1: V. 9. 1: Mant. 4. 2.

Þórer Skeggjason, III. 20. 2.

Þórer Snepill Ketilsson, III. 16. 1; 16. 5: Gen. A. 31; 34.

Þórer Steingrímsson Trolla, II. 29. 3.

Þórer Steinmóðsson, Hv. 4. 12.

Þórer enn Svarte, III. 12. 6.

Þórer konungr Svína-Baoðvarsson, IV. 12. 1: Gen. B. 16 (Kaunsson).

Þórer iarl Þegjande Raognvallzson Mæraiarls, III. 5. 2: IV. 14. 1-2.

Þórer Þiðrande, IV. 4. 1: V. 17. 2: Gen. A. 19; 27-8.

Þórer Þórbergsson (al. Hróarsson), II. 6. 4.

Þórer Þórbrannzson, II. 7. 2.

Þórer Þórfinnzson, II. 5. 4.

Þórer (al. Þórkell) Þórfinnzson, IV. 3. 3 n.

Þórer Þórgilsson, of Akrar, II. 4. 15.

Þórer Þórkelsson Þrastarsonar, II. 30. 3-4.

Þórer Þrándarson, II. 4. 15.

Þórer Þurs, see Þórðr Þurs.

Þórer Þursa-sprenger, III. 14. 17.

Þórey Einarsdótter, III. 19. 4.

Þórey Eyjolfsdótter ens Halta, III. 7. 1: IV. 14. 4: Gen. B. 10;  15.

Þórey Gestzdótter Oddleifssonar, II. 21. 1.

Þórfiðr Geirleifsson, II. 21. 1.

Þórfiðr Goðlaugsson, II. 5. 8: III. 6. 4: Gen. B. 13.

Þórfiðr Hlennesson, II. 21. 1.

Þórfiðr Hróarsson Tungo-goða, IV. 18. 1.

Þórfiðr á Skeggja-staoðom, IV. 3. 3.

Þórfiðr Þórbrannzson, II. 11. 6.

Þórfinna Vermundardótter, II. 7. 8; 15. 9 b: Gen. B. 2.

Þórfinnr Carls-emne Þórðarson Hesthaofða, II. 15. 4: III. 11. 2.

Þórfinnr Finngeirsson, II. 11. 3-4: Th. 7. 1: 9. 3.

Þórfinnr Hausa-kliúfr Torf-Einarsson, Earl of the Orkneys, II. 14. 2;
19. 2.

Þórfinnr Sel-Þóresson, I. 10. 3: II. 5. 4; 5. 7; 11. 3.

Þórfinnr Þórbiarnarson Blesa, II. 3. 8.

Þórfinnr Þórgeirsson, abbot, II. 20. 9; 23. 2.

Þórfinnr enn Strange, II. 4. 3; 4. 11.

Þórgautr  Myra-Cniúcsson, II. 20. 8; 23. 2.

Þórgautr of Þórgautzstaðir, II. 2. 3.

Þórgeirr, f. of Ámunde, II. 22. 6.

Þórgeirr Ásbrannzson, III. 3. 1.

Þórgeirr or Ásgarðz-hólom, Gen. B. 13.

Þórgeirr Ásgeirsson, V. 14. 7.

Þórgeirr Ásgrímsson í Odda, V. 7. 5; 8. 3; 8. 7; 9. 2 (?).

Þórgeirr Blundr Geirsson, I. 9. 6.

Þórgeirr Caðalsson, II. 15. 13.

Þórgeirr Cengr Geirroeðarson, II. 10. 4; 11. 5: Th. 9. 3.

Þórgeirr Claufe, III. 22. 1.

Þórgeirr Eilífsson, V. 9. 6: Gen. B. 7.

Þórgeirr Eiríksson, III. 8. 1.

Þórgeirr Finnzson, I. 7. 8.

Þórgeirr Flosco-bak Onundarson, II. 29. 1: Gen. B. 5.

Þórgeirr Galtason frá Ásgeirsá, III. 7. 4; 20. 3: Gen. B. 11.

Þórgeirr Goðe Þórkelsson at Liósavatne, Laogsaogomaðr, II. 15. 9:
III. 16. 1; 17. 2; 18. 1: V. 7. 9: Gen. A. 31   (here and elsewhere
in Gen. called Tiorvason); 34: Lib. 5. 5; 7. 6; 8. 3; p. 328. 1:
Cr. 8. 6-9.

Þórgeirr Gollner Ófeigsson (al. Þórolfsson), I. 10. 7: III. 2. 3:
V. 3. 4-6: Gen. A. 8.

Þórgeirr Gunnsteinsson Berserkjabana, V. 9. 7.

Þórgeirr Hallason, III. 15. 8: Cr. 10. 10.

Þórgeirr Hávarsson, I. 7. 3: II. 15. 11: Gen. B. 12.

Þórgeirr Haofða-Þórðarson, III. 7. 1; 11. 2.

Þórgeirr Hoeggven-kinne Hafnar-Ormsson, I. 7. 11: II. 15. 3:
III. 21. 3.

Þórgeirr enn Haorðske Bárðarson Blaondohorns, I. 7. 4-5: V. 3. 3.

Þórgeirr enn Hvinverske, III. 15. 4.

Þórgeirr Iarðlangr, II. 4. 7.

Þórgeirr Lambe of Lambastaðer, II. 4. 12; 20. 5.

Þórgeirr Langhaofðe Þórfinnzson, II. 20. 9; 21. 1.

Þórgeirr Meldun of Tungofell, I. 9. 2: II. 4. 3.

Þórgeirr enn Óðe Liótolfsson Goða, III. 12. 4.

Þórgeirr Ofláte Arnórsson, III. 12. 2.

Þórgeirr Rauðr Einarsson Stafhyltings, II. 26. 4.

Þórgeirr Skolm, III. 15. 16.

Þórgeirr Skorar-Geirr Holta-þóresson, V. 3. 3: Gen. A. 8; 20.

Þórgeirr Starkaðarson, Gen. A. 4.

Þórgeirr Suða, II. 19. 5.

Þórgeirr Vestarsson, IV. 5. 1.

Þórgeirr af Víðe-mýre, II. 4. 5.

Þórgeirr Vífilsson, II. 6. 5; 15. 4.

Þórgeirr Vorsa-Ulfsson, IV. 14. 8.

Þórgeirr, f. of Yngvildr, III. 8. 1.

Þórgeirr Þórðarson Bialca, III. 15. 10; 20. 2.

Þórgeirr Þórðarson Freysgoða, Gen. A. 25.

Þórgeirr i Þórgeirsfirðe, III. 16. 4.

Þórgeirr Þórhaddzson or Hitar-dale, II. 4. 14; 12. 2.

Þórgeirr Þórvallzson, IV. 3. 4.

Þórgerðr Álfsdótter, II. 15. 11; 19. 3: Gen. B. 12.

Þórgerðr Baoðolfsdótter, III. 15. 3; 20. 1.

Þórgerðr Bolladótter, II. 15. 8.

Þórgerðr Brannzdótter, II. 13. 1.

Þórgerðr, d. of Cecilia, II. 22. 6.

Þórgerðr Egilsdótter Scalla-Grímssonar, II. 15. 9.

Þórgerðr Egilsdótter Síðo-Hallzsonar, IV. 14. 4: V. 9. 10: Gen. B. 10;
15: Lib. 305. 13: Cr. 10. 7: Io. 1. 1; 2. 2.

Þórgerðr Einarsdótter Skálaglams, II. 9. 3.

Þórgerðr Eylaugsdóttir, I. 4. 1   (= Þórgerðr Háleygsdótter?).

Þórgerðr Eyvindardóttir, I. 5. 1.

Þórgerðr Gísladótter, II. 15. 7.

Þórgerðr Glúmsdótter, II. 17. 4: III. 21. 3.

Þórgerðr Háleygsdótter, Gen. A. 32.

Þórgerðr, m. of Hallr the Abbot, III. 19. 5.

Þórgerðr Helgadótter Hestz, III. 19. 5.

Þórgerðr, m. of Hialte Skeggjason, Gen. B. 7.

Þórgerðr Haoscullzdótter, II. 15. 8-9.

Þórgerðr Ketilbiarnardótter, V. 14. 3; 14. 7.

Þórgerðr Másdótter, Gen. A. 15.

Þórgerðr Nafar-Helgadótter, III. 12. 2.

Þórgerðr Oddzdótter Kaldmunnz, V. 3. 7.

Þórgerðr Ófeigsdótter, V. 3. 4.

Þórgerðr Rafnsdótter, p. 639. 4.

Þórgerðr at Sandfelle, IV. 15. 1-4.

Þórgerðr  Síðo-Hallzdótter, IV. 14. 4: Gen. B. 15.

Þórgerðr Sigfússdótter Ásgrímssonar, III. 15. 5.

Þórgerðr Sigfússdótter Ellida-Grímssonar, I. 6. 8: Gen. A. 13.

Þórgerðr Sigmundardótter, V. 5. 2; 7. 2.

Þórgerðr Skíðadótter, Gen. A. 32.

Þórgerðr Valþiófsdótter, II. 7. 1.

Þórgerðr Þórbiarnardótter Ormsson, p. 641. 31.

Þórgerðr Þórbiarnardótter Vífilsson, II. 4. 13; 7. 5.

Þórgerðr Þórbrannzdótter, II. 8. 1.

Þórgerðr Þórðardótter Erro, II. 3. 8.

Þórgerðr Þórðardótter frá Múla, II. 18. 1: Gen. B. 9.

Þórgerðr Þórfinnzdótter Heiðar-eckja, II. 3. 8.

Þórgerðr Þórgeirsdótter Ásbrannzsonar, III. 3. 1.

Þórgerðr (al. Þuríðr) Þórgeirsdótter Gollnes, V. 3. 6.

Þórgerðr Þórgeirsdótter Hoeggven-kinna, II. 15. 3.

Þórgerðr Þórgilsdótter, Th. 8. 3.

Þórgerðr Þórsteinsdótter Rauðs, II. 14. 1; 14. 3; 15. 9-10: Gen. A. 35.

Þórgestr, s. of Arnbiorg, II. 3. 5.

Þórgestr Bersason, I. 7. 2.

Þórgestr Steinsson Miok-siglanda, II. 11. 8; 12. 2; 12. 4: Th. 9. 3
(enn Gamle).

Þórgestr, s. of Þórdís, II. 15. 2.

Þórgils Arason of Reykjahólar, II. 2. 1; 6. 5; 19. 3: Gen. B. 12;
14-15.

Þórgils Arason ens Fróða, Gen. B. 14.

Þórgils Arngeirsson, III. 22. 3-4.

Þórgils Ásbiarnarson, IV. 15. 3.

Þórgils Auga Grímsson, I. 10. 6.

Þórgils Cnappe, II. 4. 15.

Þórgils Collzson, II. 19. 5; 20. 2.

Þórgils Eilífsson, Cr. 3. 5: Thorv. 7.

Þórgils Errobeins-stiúpr Þórðarson, V. 11. 2; 12. 2.

Þórgils Geirsteinsson, II. 20. 9.

Þórgils Gellisson, f. of Are Fróðe, II. 12. 6: V. 17. 1: Gen. B. 14:
Th. 7. 4: Lib. 306. 18.

Þórgils Giallande, III. 4. 1; 5. 15.

Þórgils Gormsson, III. 9. 1.

Þórgils Grímsson, II. 21. 1: V. 15. 1.

Þórgils, husband of Gunnhildr Símonardótter, II. 6. 4.

Þórgils Hafliðason, Gen. B. 10.

Þórgils Haolloson (ok Snorra Alfssonar), II. 15. 11; 21. 1.

Þórgils Húnbogason, Gen. B. 10.

Þórgils Oddason, Gen. B. 9; 11: Mant. 1. 3; 1. 6: Cr. 10. 10:
Hv. 3. 13: pp. 598-9; 641. 31.

Þórgils Reyðar-síða, Gen. A. 36.

Þórgils Vámúle Grenjaðarson, III. 19. 5: Cr. 1. 3.

Þórgils Þórbeinesson, Th. 8. 3.

Þórgils Þórbiarnarson Laxakarls, V. 13 3.

Þórgils Þórbiarnarson Loka, II. 20. 2.

Þórgils, husband of Þórey Gestzdótter Oddleifssonar, II. 21. 1.

Þórgils Þórfinnzson, II. 5. 4.

Þórgils Þórgeirsson Goða, III. 18. 1.

Þórgils Þórsteinsson ens Hvíta, IV. 3. 1; 3. 3: Gen. A. 28: Mant. 5. 6.

Þórgils Þórsteinsson Lunans, V. 9. 3; 9. 6.

Þórgils Þórvarðzson Orra-skald, I. 8. 3.

Þórgnýr Laogmaðr af Svia-rike, III. 16. 1.

Þórgríma Skeiðar-kinn Haofða-Þórðardótter, III. 11. 2.

Þórgrímr Bíldr Ulfsson, V. 16. 1-2.

Þórgrímr Bræker, II. 3. 4.

Þórgrímr Campe Ozorarson, V. 10. 5; 12. 1-2.

Þórgrímr Cárnsár-goðe Hallormsson, II. 5. 10.

Þórgrímr Ceallacsson ens Gamla, I. 7. 5: II. 9. 7; 10. 4; 15. 9 b:
V. 17. 4: Gen. B. 2; 10: Th. 7. 3; 9. 3; 10. 3.

Þórgrímr Colsson, II. 8. 2.

Þórgrímr Cugge Hialmolfsson, III. 8. 4.

Þórgrímr Digr-Ketilsson, Gen. B. 15.

Þórgrímr Erro-beinn Þórmóðarson, V. 12. 2; 12. 4.

Þórgrímr Eyjolfsson, II. 20. 8.

Þórgrímr Gagarr Liótzson, II. 24. 1-2.

Þórgrímr Gnúpa-Bárðarson, IV. 15. 5.

Þorgrímr Grímolfsson, V. 16. 6.

Þórgrímr Gunnolfsson, III. 12. 8.

Þórgrímr Gunnsteinsson ok Hlífar, III. 14. 20-21.

Þórgrímr Harðrefsson (al. Þórmóðr, f. of Ásdís), II. 23. 2-3; 24. 1.

Þórgrímr enn Háve, IV. 3. 1.

Þórgrímr Haofða-Þórðarson, III. 11. 2.

Þórgrímr Hæro-kollr Onundarson, II. 29. 1: Gen. B. 4 (Auðunnarson); 5.

Þórgrímr enn Mikle Þórgeirsson, V. 3. 3: Gen. A. 8 (Holta-Þóresson);
20 (id.).

Þórgrímr Oddzson, II. 7. 2.

Þórgrímr Petarsson, III. 3. 1.

Þórgrímr, f. of Sigurðr, V. 16. 7.

Þórgrímr Skraute Þórkelsson, Gen. A. 22.

Þórgrímr Sviðe, II. 21. 1: Gen. B. 13.

Þórgrímr Vermundarson ens Mióva, II. 11. 7.

Þórgrímr Þaungull Ceallacsson, II. 16. 1-2.

Þórgrímr Þórbiarnarson Skaga, III. 18. 3; 19. 4.

Þórgrímr Þóresson í Maoðrofelle, III. 15. 6.

Þórgrímr Þórgeirsson Goða, III. 18. 1.

Þórgrímr Þórgeirsson Goða (half-brother of prec), III. 18. 1.

Þórgrímr, f. of Þórkatla, II. 13. 1.

Þórgrímr Þórsteinsson ens Grá, IV. 11. 8.

Þórgrímr Þórsteinsson Þorskabíts, II. 10. 5; 15. 14; 22. 8: Gen. A. 36:
Th. 11. 3: p. 319. 6.

Þórgrímr or Þyckva-skóge, II. 15. 10.

Þórhaddr, f. of Brandr, II. 23. 2(= Þóroddr Þórðarson Þvara).

Þórhaddr enn Gamle, IV. 11. 1.

Þórhaddr Skál Haf-Liótzson, IV. 5. 4.

Þórhaddr Steinsson Mioksiglanda of Hitárdalr, II. 4. 3; 4. 14; 11 8;
30. 1.

Þórhaddr Þórgestzson, II. 11. 8.

Þórhalla Ásgrímsdótter, Gen. A. 13.

Þórhalla Skaptadótter, Hv. 1. 1.

Þórhalle Colgrímsson, I. 7. 7.

Þórhallr, f. of Ásgrímr, Mant. 1. 7.

Þórhallr Ásgrímsson, Gen. A. 13.

Þórhallr Ásgrímsson (another), Gen. A. 13.

Þórhallr Cetilsson Gufo, II. 17. 6; 20. 6   (= Þóroddr Ýrarson,
Gen. B. 8 ?).

Þórhallr Eiðarson. p. 641. 38.

Þórhallr Goðe Oddason, II. 15. 9 b: Gen. B. 2.

Þórhallr (? af Hitárnese), Ch. 631.

Þórhallr Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

Þórhallr Knappr, pp. 416-17.

Þórhallr Spámaðr, pp. 417-19.

Þórhallr Þórláksson, V. 9. 3: Þorl. 2. 1.

Þórhallr Þórsteinsson Tialdstoeðings, V. 8. 6.

Þórhildr, p. 417.

Þórhildr Biartmársdótter, II. 22. 3; 22. 7.

Þórhildr Helgadótter ens Magra, III. 14. 19.

Þórhildr Riúpa Þórðardótter, III. 11. 2: Lib. 305. 17.

Þórhildr Skáld-kona, Gen. A. 6.

Þórhildr Solvadótter, I. 7. 5.

Þórhildr Þórkelsdótter, Th. 10. 3.

Þórhildr Þórsteinsdótter Haugabriótz, V. 3. 2.

Þórhildr Þórsteinsdótter Ingolfssonar, Gen. B. 10.

Þórhildr Þórsteinsdótter Rauðs, II. 14. 1; 15. 10: III. 1. 1:
Gen. B. 12 (Hildr).

Þórhildr Þórvarðzdótter, V. 16. 7.

Þórhrolfr Fasthalde, see Þórólfr Fasthalde.

Þóríðr Arnbiarnardótter, II. 15. 9.

Þóríðr Arngeirsdótter, III. 22. 3-4.

Þóríðr Arnórsdótter, III. 15. 10.

Þóríðr Ásbrannzdótter, II. 7. 2.

Þóríðr Ásgeirsdótter Æðe-kollz, II. 15. 14; 29. 1: Gen. B. 4-5.

Þóríðr Auðunnardótter Stota, II. 8. 1; 8. 5.

Þóríðr Barkardótter Digra, II. 7. 5; 22. 8.

Þóríðr Dylla Gunnlaugsdótter, I. 6. 4: II. 2. 1.

Þóríðr Eilífsdótter, V. 7. 5; 8. 7.

Þóríðr Eyrlygsdótter, p. 641. 10.

Þóríðr Eyvindardótter Austmannz, w. of Þórsteinn Rauðr, II. 14. 1;
14. 4.

Þóríðr Gilsdótter, Hv. 4. 1.

Þóríðr Gunnarsdótter Hámundarsonar, V. 8. 6.

Þóríðr, m. of Gunnhildr, I. 10. 4.

Þóríðr (al. Þóra) Gunnsteinsdótter, II. 26. 5.

Þóríðr Gyðja Solmundardótter, III. 5. 13.

Þóríðr Hallzdótter Mió-doelings, III. 12. 3.

Þóríðr Hallzdótter, p. 641. 34.

Þóríðr Harallzdótter Gollskeggs, III. 6. 1: V. 11. 1.

Þóríðr Helgadótter Biartmárssonar, II. 22. 3.

Þóríðr Haofða-Þórðardótter, III. 11. 2.

Þóríðr Hofgyðja Véþormsdótter, IV. 15. 3.

Þóríðr Haoscullzdótter, II. 15. 8-9.

Þóríðr Hrafnsdótter, II. 23. 1.

Þóríðr Ketilbiarnardótter, I. 4. 4: V. 12. 2; 14. 3.

Þóríðr (al. Þórdís) Óleifsdótter Feilans, I. 9. 4: II. 15. 14.

Þóríðr Óleifsdótter Pá, II. 15. 9: Gen. B. 2.

Þóríðr Refsdótter, III. 11. 2: p. 414.

Þóríðr Rúmgylta, II. 22. 5; 24. 8.

Þóríðr Sigfússdótter or Hlíð, V. 8. 6.

Þóríðr Spaka Snorradótter, II. 8. 1: Gen. B. 13: Lib. 1. 1.

Þóríðr Spákona of Graof, II. 3. 6.

Þóríðr Steinolfsdótter ens Lága, II. 18. 2.

Þóríðr Sturludótter, p. 639. 3.

Þóríðr Sunda-fyller, II. 24. 5.

Þóríðr Tumadótter, Gm. 610-12.

Þóríðr Tungo-Oddzdótter, I. 9. 1; 10. 3: II. 5. 7.

Þóríðr Tyrfingsdótter, V. 11. 4.

Þóríðr Valþiófsdótter, I. 11. 2: II. 20. 6.

Þóríðr Þórbiarnardótter ens Gaulverska, V. 6. 2.

Þóríðr Þórbiarnardótter Þórvallzsonar, II. 7. 2.

Þóríðr Þórðardótter Skeggja, III. 8. 1.

Þóríðr Þórðardótter Sturlusonar, II. 23. 2: Gen. B. 13: Mant. 1. 7.

Þóríðr Þóresdótter Hallaðarsonar iarls, II. 20. 2.

Þóríðr Þórfinnzdótter, II. 4. 3   ( = Þórdís Þorfinnzdótter,
II. 4. 11).

Þóríðr Þórfinnzdótter, wife of Þórbrandr of Alftafiorðr, II. 5. 4.

Þóríðr Þórgeirsdótter, V. 9. 1-2.

Þóríðr Þórgilsdótter Arasonar, II. 8. 1.

Þóríðr Þórkelsdótter or Goðdaolom, III. 12. 1.

Þóríðr Þórleifsdótter Ásmundarsonar, III. 20. 1.

Þóríðr Þórleifsdótter Avangrssonar, I. 7. 1.

Þóríðr Þórleifsdótter Eyvindarsonar Cnés, II. 22. 5.

Þóríðr Þórsteinsdótter, p. 642. 39.

Þórilldr, see Þórhildr.

Þórkatla Baoðvarsdótter, III. 21. 1.

Þórkatla Dala-Collzdótter, II. 15. 9: III. 18. 1.

Þórkatla Halldórsdótter Collzsonar, III. 2. 3.

Þórkatla Halldórsdótter Snorrasonar, II. 20. 2: III. 6. 4.

Þórkatla Hergilsdótter, II. 17. 4; 19. 1.

Þórkatla Hringja, V. 8. 1-2.

Þórkatla Ketilbiarnardótter, V. 7. 2; 14. 3; 14. 7: Gen. A. 14.

Þórkatla Ófeigsdótter, II. 17. 6.

Þórkatla, d. of Otkatla, V. 13. 3.

Þórkatla Skeggjadótter, II. 7. 2.

Þórkatla Vémundardótter, IV. 19. 3.

Þórkatla Þórgrímsdótter, II. 13. 1.

Þórkatla Þórsteinsdótter Tiald-stoeðings, V. 8. 6.

Þórkatla Þórvallzdótter, II. 3. 7.

Þórkell Ásgeirsson Kneifar, I. 5. 1: V. 3. 2: Io. 1. 1.

Þórkell Blund-Cetilsson, II. 2. 5: Lib. 5. 1.

Þórkell Bundin-fóte, V. 6. 3; 7. 8: Gen. 4.

Þórkell Claca, IV. 10. 2.

Þórkell Colzson, V. 14. 5.

Þórkell Corna-múle, I. 10. 7.

Þórkell Crafla, Cr. 1. 2.

Þórkell Cugge Þórðarson Gellis, II. 7. 8; 15. 9 b: 15. 14; 29. 1:
Gen. B. 2; 4; 5.

Þórkell Dufnallsson, II. 15. 7.

Þórkell Eiríksson or Goðdaolom, III. 8. 1; 12. 1; Gen. A. 33: Cr. 6. 1.

Þórkell Eiríksson or Keldo-dal, II. 22. 6.

Þórkell Eyjolfsson Grá, II. 15. 14.

Þórkell Eyjolfsson í Haga, III. 14. 11.

Þórkell Eyjolfsson, Þórðarssonar Gellis, II. 15. 8: Gen. B. 14:
Lib. 306. 17: Hv. 1. 12.

Þórkell Eysteinsson, p. 642. 39.

Þórkell enn Fagre, Gen. A. 22.

Þórkell Farserkr í Hvalseyjar-firðe, II. 12. 10.

Þórkell Fullspakr Ketilsson, Gen. A. 27.

Þórkell Fullspakr í Niarðvík, IV. 8. 1: Gen. A. 27.

Þórkell Geirason, the Canon, IV. 15. 5: Þorl. 6. 1; 7. 2; 12. 9.

Þórkell Geirason, the Leech, IV. 15. 5.

Þórkell Geitisson, IV. 2. 2: Gen. A. 19: B. 15.

Þórkell Gellisson, II. 19. 2: Gen. B. 14: Mant. 1. 7: Lib. 1. 1;
1. 4; 6. 3; 306. 17.

Þórkell Gollcar Þóresson, V. 12. 4.

Þórkell Grímsson Kaogors, II. 24. 2.

Þórkell Gunnvallzson, II. 4. 5.

Þórkell Háeyjar-tyrðill (al. Háeyrar-), Gen. A. 24.

Þórkell Hákr Þórgeirsson, III. 18. 1: Gen. A. 34.

Þórkell Hallbiarnarson or Alviðro, V. 10. 6.

Þórkell Hallzson, priest, Pol. 2. 3; 11. 2.

Þórkell Háve at Groenavatne, III. 9. 2; 21. 2.

Þórkell Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

Þórkell Kappe enn Auðge Þórðarson, II. 23. 2.

Þórkell Langr, see Þórkell Leifr.

Þórkell Leifr enn Háve Þóresson, III. 17. 2; 18. 1: Gen. A. 31
(Þórkell Langr); 34 (id.).

Þórkell Lón-Einarsson, II. 6. 5.

Þórkell Máne Þórsteinsson, I. 3. 10: III. 6. 6: V. 7. 9: Gen. B. 10 :
Lib. 3. 1; 4. 2; 5. 4: p. 327. 17: Cr. 1. 2.

Þórkell Meinakr, Th. 10. 3.

Þórkell Naumdoela-iarl, V. 4. 1.

Þórkell Osvifsson, II. 9. 3.

Þórkell Scumsson, Abbot, III. 20. 2: Pol. 15. 2.

Þórkell Sigmundarson, II. 6. 4.

Þórkell Skota-Collr Braondolfsson, V. 13. 4: Hv. 3. 1.

Þórkell Starkaðarson, Gen. A. 4.

Þórkell Steinolfsson á Mýrom, II. 20. 8; 23. 2.

Þórkell Súrsson, II. 22. 8: p. 319. 6.

Þórkell enn Svarte Þóresson Snepils, III. 15. 10; 16. 1; 17. 2; 18. 1:
Gen. A. 31; 34.

Þórkell Svartcellsson, I. 6. 5-6.

Þórkell Tiaorvason Laogsaogomaðr, Lib. 8. 6.

Þórkell Torfason, I. 6. 6; 10. 2.

Þórkell Trandill Þórbiarnarson, V. 13. 3: Io. 13. 5.

Þórkell Trefill Rauða-Biarnarson, II. 4. 5; 20. 1; 26. 4.

Þórkell af Víðemýre, Io. 12. 2.

Þórkell Vingner Atlason, III. 7. 4.

Þórkell Þialfe (al. Biálfe), V. 9. 11.

Þórkell Þórðarson Þórkelssonar, II. 22. 6.

Þórkell Þórfinnzson, II. 5. 4.

Þórkell (al. Þórer) Þórfinnzson, IV. 3. 3.

Þórkell Þórgeirsson Rauðs, II. 26. 4.

Þórkell, s. of Þórhildr Þórsteinsdótter, Gen. B. 9.

Þórkell Þrastarson, II. 30. 3.

Þórlákr Ásgeirsson of Eyrr, II. 8. 1; 11. 7: Gen. B. 13.

Þórlákr enn Auðge Ormsson of Hitárdalr, II. 4. 14.

Þórlákr Bergþórsson, V. 9. 3.

Þórlákr Guðmundarson Gríss, II. 22. 6.

Þórlákr Há-Snorrason, II. 29. 3.

Þórlákr enn Helge Þórhallzson, bishop, III. 4. 1: IV. 15. 5; 18. 7-8:
V. 3. 2; 9. 3; 10. 4: Hv. 5. 11: Þorl. 1. 1, &c.: Pol. 1. 1; 1. 9;
2. 1; 6. 2, &c.: Od. 1. 1; 2. 2-3; 3. 3: pp. 569, 598.

Þórlákr Ketilsson, p. 641. 3, 22.

Þórlákr Ketilsson prests, Pol. 6. 3; 10. 4.

Þórlákr, f. Magnus á Melum, Ch. 635.

Þórlákr Rúnolfsson, bishop, I. 9. 4: II. 15. 4: V. 11. 6; 13. 4:
Lib. pr. 1; 10. 10-11: p. 305. 18: Cr. 10. 9: Hv. 2. 11; 3. 1, &c;
4. 3; 4. 10: Þorl. 1. 1; 14. 3: Io. 3. 3: 14. 3.

Þórlákr Steinþórsson of Eyrr, II. 8. 5.

Þórlákr Valgerðarson, p. 639. 7.

Þórlákr (al. Þórleikr) Þórarensson, I. 9. 4: V. 13. 4: Lib. 10. 10:
Hv. 3. 1.

Þórlákr Þórsteinsson, Gm. 607.

Þórlaug Ásgrímsdótter, V. 8. 1.

Þórlaug Atladótter ens Ramma, III. 6. 6: Gen. A. 32.

Þórlaug Gyðja Hrólfsdótter, I. 11. 4: II. 20. 6.

Þórlaug Haofða-Þórðardótter, III. 9. 2; 11. 2.

Þórlaug Hrafnsdótter Hoengssonar, V. 4. 7; 6. 2.

Þórlaug Kloeingsdótter, I. 5. 1.

Þórlaug Sæmundardótter, III. 6. 6.

Þórlaug Þórmóðardótter (= Geirlaug Þórmóðardótter?), I. 10. 4.

Þórlaug Þórvallzdótter, V. 9. 10: Gen. B. 15: Io. 1. 1; 2. 2.

Þórleif, d. of Ciolvaor, I. 10. 4.

Þórleif Þórðardótter, II. 22. 6.

Þórleifr Ásmundarson, III. 20. 1.

Þórleifr Avangrsson, I. 7. 1.

Þórleifr Beiskalde Þórláksson, V. 13. 5: Pol. 6. 3; 15. 2: Od. 4. 2:
pp. 639. 6; 641. 29.

Þórleifr Brannzson, I. 7. 5.

Þórleifr Braondolfsson, V. 13. 4.

Þórleifr Cimbe Þórbrannzon, II. 11. 6.

Þórleifr or Crossavík, Cr. 8. 7.

Þórleifr Eyvindarson Cnés, II. 22. 5; 24. 8.

Þórleifr Geirolfs-stiúpr Þórgrímsson, III. 19. 4.

Þórleifr Gneiste, V. 7. 2.

Þórleifr Hrómundarfóstre Þórbiarnarson Þynnu, II. 30. 3-4.

Þórleifr Hvala-skúfr Ánsson, IV. 12. 1: Gen. B. 16 (Arnarson Hyrno).

Þórleifr Ketilbiarnarson, V. 14. 3.

Þórleifr Krákr Holta-Þóresson, V. 3. 3: Gen. A. 8; 20.

Þórleifr Miðlungr Baoðvarsson, IV. 12. 1: Gen. B. 16.

Þórleifr Skáld Ásgeirsson Rauðfeldar, III. 14. 6.

Þórleifr Snorrason Goða, Gen. B. 13.

Þórleifr or Sogne, V. 12. 1.

Þórleifr enn Spake Haorða-Kárason, IV. 13. 2: Gen. B. 15-16: Lib. 2. 2.

Þórleifr Steinolfsson, II. 4. 13.

Þórleifr Þióstolfsson, I. 6. 4.

Þórleifr Þórðarson, Od. 4. 1: Ch. 635: p. 640. 49.

Þórleifr Þórvallzson, II. 13. 1.

Þórleikr Bollason, II. 9. 3; 15. 8.

Þórleikr Brannzson, II. 9. 4.

Þórleikr Haoscullzson, II. 15. 8-9; 20. 7: III. 11. 2: Gen. A. 35.

Þórleikr Ormsson, p. 641. 29, 40.

Þórleikr Þórarensson, see Þórlákr.

Þórleikr Þórleifsson, p. 639. 6.

Þórliót Eysteinsdótter, IV. 16. 4.

Þórliót Hialtadótter, III. 9. 2.

Þórliót Steinroeðardótter, III. 14. 18.

Þórliótr Hrútzson, II. 15. 10.

*Þórmódr, an Irish thrall, II. 20. 3; 20. 5.

Þórmóðr, f. of Ásdís (al. Þórgrímr Harðrefsson), II. 23. 2.

Þórmóðr Breiðsson, II. 6. 4.

Þórmóðr Cársson, V. 16. 2.

Þórmóðr Colbrúnarskáld Bersason, II. 20. 8; 26. 1.

Þórmóðr enn Gamle Bresason, of Akranes, I. 6. 4; 7. 2; 7. 10; 11. 1:
[II. 2. 1].

Þórmóðr Goðe Oddzson, II. 5. 6-7; 8. 1; 9. 4: Th. 7. 3.

Þórmóðr í Grene-vík, III. 16. 3.

Þórmóðr Hamalsson, I. 3. 10.

Þórmóðr Ketilbiarnarson, V. 14. 3.

Þórmóðr, a priest, Cr. 8. 3.

Þórmóðr enn Ramme Harallzson á Siglanese, III. 12. 6-7.

Þórmóðr Skafte Oleifsson Breiðs, V. 12. 5; 13. 1-2: Gen. A. 16:
Mant. 5. 5.

Þórmóðr Scalle Haofða-Þórðarson, III. 11. 2.

Þórmóðr Skeiða-goðe Goðmundarson, I. 3. 10.

Þórmóðr Steinroeðarson, V. 16. 2.

Þórmóðr Sticko-blígr Steinbiarnarson, IV. 2. 2.

Þórmóðr Þióstarsson, I. 7. 1; 11. 3: II. 17. 6; 20. 6: IV. 17. 4:
V. 7. 2: Gen. B. 8.

Þórmóðr Þórbiarnarson Iarlakappa, V. 13. 5.

Þórmóðr Þórbrannzson, II. 11. 6.

Þórmóðr, f. of Þórgrímr Errobeinn, V. 12. 2.

Þórmóðr Þórkellsson, I. 3. 10: III. 6. 6: pp. 327. 18; 328. 3.

Þórmóðr lækner Þórgeirsson, Gen. B. 5.

Þórmóðr Þórláksson, II. 8. 1; 11. 7: Gen. B. 13.

Þórný Goðbrannzdótter Kúlo, Gen. B. 5.

Þórný, d. of Gunnvaor, I. 9. 4.

Þórný Sigmundardótter, III. 9. 2.

Þórný Þórsteinsdótter, see Þórunn.

Þórodda Onundardótter, I. 10. 1.

Þóroddr Biarnarson, III. 14. 12.

Þóroddr Draópo-stúfr Arnórsson, III. 1. 2.

Þóroddr Gamlason, Io. 9. 2.

Þóroddr Goðe Eyvindarson, V. 13. 2; 16. 6: Gen. A. 16: Cr. 1. 2;
8. 5: Hv. 1. 1: Io. 1. 2.

Þóroddr Hialmr, III. 7. 1; 11. 2; 14. 19: Gen. A. 32: p. 642. 4.

Þóroddr Hrísa-Blundr, I. 9. 6.

Þóroddr Skatt-kaupande, II. 22. 8.

Þóroddr, f. of Snerir, Gen. B. 9; 11.

Þóroddr Snorrason Goða, Gen. B. 13.

Þóroddr Tungo-Oddzson, I. 10. 3: II. 15. 14: IV. 17. 4.

Þóroddr Ýrarson, Gen. B. 8   ( = Þórhallr Cetilsson Gufo?).

Þóroddr í Þingnese, II. 26. 2; 26. 4.

Þóroddr Þórbrannzson, II. 11. 6.

Þóroddr Þórðarson Þvara, IV. 3. 7   ( = Þórhaddr, f. of Brandr).

Þóroddr á Þóroddz-staoðom, III. 1. 2.

Þórolfr Asksson í Þórolfsfelle, V. 3. 4-5.

Þórolfr Blaoðro-skalle, II. 8. 1: Th. 7. 2.

Þórolfr Bræker, II. 22. 5; 24. 7.

Þórolfr Boegefótr Biarnarson, II. 7. 6; 11. 4-5.

Þórolfr Fasthalde,  II. 26. 6: III. 1. 2.

Þórolfr Halme Þórðarson, IV. 3. 7.

Þórolfr Halme, f. of Þórðr Þvare, IV. 3. 7.

Þórolfr Herjolfsson Hornabriótz, V. 2. 1-2.

Þórolfr Kveld-Ulfsson, I. 8. 1: II. 4. 1: V. 4. 1; 5. 2.

Þórolfr Loftzson ens Gamla, II. 5. 8.

Þórolfr Mostrar-skegg Ornolfsson, II. 10. 1-5; 20. 1: V. 17. 2:
Gen. A. 36 (here also called Þórgilsson Reyðarsíðo; cfr. Introduction
to Early Geneal. pp. 237-8): Th. 2. 3-5. 1; 6. 1-2; 7. 4-5; 9. 1;
9. 3: Lib. 4. 2.

Þórolfr Nafar-Helgason, III. 12. 2.

Þórolfr Osvifsson, II. 9. 3: Gen. B. 3: Cr. 3. 6.

Þórolfr Refr Eysteinsson Meinfrets, II. 15. 11: III. 1. 1: Lib. 5. 1.

Þórolfr Skalla-Grímsson, II. 4. 1; 4. 11.

Þórolfr Skialgr Ogmundarson, Gen. B. 15-16.

Þórolfr, f. of Skæringr, V. 3. 2.

Þórolfr Smior Þórsteinsson, I. 2. 3; 6. 8: III. 15. 8: Gen. A. 32.

Þórolfr Spaorr (= Þorbiaorn Spaorr?), II. 20. 8; 21. 4.

Þórolfr Váganef Hroereksson (or Þróndarson), V. 3. 1: Gen. A. 1; B. 16.

Þórolfr Véleifsson, III. 21. 3.

Þórolfr Vili-gisl, I. 6. 5.

Þórolfr OExna-Þóresson, III. 14. 21.

Þórolfr, f. of Þórgeirr Gollner, Gen. A. 8; see Ófeigr i Raums-dal.

Þórolfr Þórgilsson, see Þórolfr Mostrar-skegg.

Þórolfr Þórsteinsson Kolskeggs, II. 7. 8; 11. 5: Th. 8. 3 (Herjolfsson
Holkin-raza).

Þórolfr Þróndarson, see Þórolfr Váganef.

Þórormr, br. of Hallormr á Cárnsá, III. 5. 10.

Þórormr Helgason, III. 4. 1.

Þórormr í Karlafirðe, V. 13. 5.

Þórormr Þórfinnzson, II. 5. 4.

Þórormr or Þrumo, V. 8. 2.

Þórríðr, see Þóríðr.

Þorskfirðingar, II. 17. 5.

Þórsnesingar, II. 10. 4: Th. 9. 3; 10. 1.

Þórsteinn Ásbiarnarson, II. 21. 1: IV. 16. 1   ( = Þórsteinn Ketilsson,
Gen. A. 23?).

Þórsteinn Ásgeirsson, II. 3. 4.

Þórsteinn Áskelsson Goða, III. 19. 4.

Þórsteinn Ásmundarson Hæro-langs, Gen. B. 5.

Þórsteinn Biarnarson í Svínhaga, V. 7. 6.

Þórsteinn Biolansson, IV. 17. 5.

Þórsteinn Baoðvarsson ens Hvíta, IV. 12. 2: V. 17. 4: Gen. A. 19:
Lib. 7. 1.

Þórsteinn Breiðmage Þórsteinsson, Gen. A. 19;  21.

Þórsteinn Clegge í Húsavík, IV. 9. 1.

Þórsteinn Collzson ens Grá, IV. 11. 8.

Þórsteinn Craofloson, II. 21. 1.

Þórsteinn Cuggason, II. 7. 8; 15. 9 b: Gen. B. 2; 4: Hv. 1. 12.

Þórsteinn Dranga-karl, IV. 18. 5: V. 7. 2.

Þórsteinn Egilsson Skallagrímssonar, II. 4. 9; 15. 14: Lib. 5. 1:
Cr. 1. 2: pp. 639. 8; 641. 15.

Þórsteinn Eiríksson Rauða, II. 15. 4.

Þórsteinn Eyjolfsson, III. 14. 4: Mant. 1. 6; 4. 2: Lib. 306. 1.

Þórsteinn Eysteinsson Auðunnarsonar, III. 4. 1.

Þórsteinn Eysteinsson frá Keldognúpe, IV. 16. 3-4.

Þórsteinn Fagre Þórfinnzson, IV. 3. 3.

Þórsteinn Flosco-skegg Ófeigsson, V. 3. 4.

Þórsteinn Gnúpa-Bárðarson, III. 17. 2; IV. 15. 5.

Þórsteinn Goðe or Ásbiarnar-vík, III. 19. 4.

Þórsteinn Goðe, f. of Biarne enn Spake, V. 7. 9; 9. 4; 13. 2.

Þórsteinn, goldsmith, Pol. 6. 6; 13. 3.

Þórsteinn Gunnarsson, III. 15. 7.

Þórsteinn Hafr-Biarnarson, V. 16. 12.

Þórsteinn Halldórsson, Gen. B. 10.

Þórsteinn Hallsteinsson, V. 11. 3.

Þórsteinn Hallvarzson, V. 15. 2: Mant. 1. 2: Hv. 3. 13.

Þórsteinn Haugabriótr, V. 3. 2.

Þórsteinn Heiðmenningr Eysteinsson, III. 6. 6.

Þórsteinn Haofðe, III. 19. 1: V. 17. 2.

Þórsteinn Holmuðr Sumarliðason, IV. 9. 5; 19. 2.

Þórsteinn Holmundr Skaptason, pp. 641. 1; 642. 37.

Þórsteinn Hrungner Molda-Gnúpsson, IV. 17. 3.

Þórsteinn enn Hvíte Olvesson ens Hvíta, IV. 1. 3; 3. 1: V. 17. 2;
17. 4: Gen. A. 28: Mant. 5. 6.

Þórsteinn Hvíte Steinsson Mioksiglanda, II. 20. 1.

Þórsteinn Ingimundarson ens Gamla, III. 5. 3: 5. 12-13: V. 17. 4:
p. 319. 16.

Þórsteinn Ingolfsson, I. 3. 10: V. 17. 4: Gen. B. 10: Lib. 3. 1;
5. 4: p. 327. 14.

Þórsteinn Jónsson Loptzsonar, Od. 2. 2; 6. 1, &c.

Þórsteinn Kambason, Gm. 612.

Þórsteinn Ketilsson ens Fíflska, Gen. A. 23 (= Þórsteinn
Ásbiarnarson?): Cr. 4. 3.

Þórsteinn Ketilsson Haorzka, III. 19. 4.

Þórsteinn Ketilsson Raums, III. 5. 1: Gen. B. 5.

Þórsteinn Kolskeggr Herjolfsson, II. 7. 8.

Þórsteinn Leggr Biarnarson Blátannar, IV. 13. 3.

Þórsteinn Liótolfsson, II. 16. 2.

Þórsteinn Lunan, V. 9. 6.

Þórsteinn Oddleifsson, II. 21. 1; 21. 4.

Þórsteinn Ondor, II. 11. 1: Th. 7. 1.

Þórsteinn OExna-broddr Oddgeirsson, V. 11. 5.

Þórsteinn Ranglátr Einarsson, III. 14. 4; 14. 10: Mant. 5. 1:
p. 640. 3.

Þórsteinn Rauðnefr Hrólfsson, V. 7. 9-10; 9. 4.

Þórsteinn Rauðr Áleifsson ens Hvíta, King of Scotland, II. 10. 5;
14. 1-3; 14. 5; 15. 9-14: III. 1. 1: Gen. A. 35-6; B. 12: Th. 5. 2;
7. 4-5: Lib. 4. 2.

Þórsteinn, f. of Rúnolfr á Reykjom, Gen. A. 17.

Þórsteinn Scrofe Grímsson, I. 6. 8: III. 15. 8: Gen. A. 32.

Þórsteinn Síðo-Hallzson, IV. 3. 1; 12. 2; 14. 4: Gen. A. 19; B. 10;
15: Hv. 4. 1.

Þórsteinn Sigmundarson, III. 21. 1: Gen. A. 31; 34.

Þórsteinn or Skarðe, deacon, Pol. 10. 1.

Þórsteinn Skeggjason, p. 639. 5.

Þórsteinn enn Skialge, IV. 14. 9.

Þórsteinn Skioldolfsson, IV. 3. 6.

Þórsteinn Snorrason Goða, II. 6. 5; 15. 4: Gen. B. 13.

Þórsteinn Smiðr Skeggjason, III. 14. 12.

Þórsteinn Solmundarson, I. 6. 8: II. 21. 1.

Þórsteinn Steinolfsson, II. 18. 1.

Þórsteinn Surtr enn Spake Hallsteinsson, II. 10. 5; 15. 12; 20. 1:
Th. 7. 5; 11. 2: Lib. 4. 2; 305. 16.

Þórsteinn Svarfaðr Rauðsson, III. 9. 4; 14. 5.

Þórsteinn Svorfr, p. 320. 1.

Þórsteinn Tiald-stæðingr Ásgrímsson, V. 7. 7; 8. 2-7.

Þórsteinn Titlingr Geirleifsson, IV. 18. 1-2: Gen. A. 4; 10; 25.

Þórsteinn Torfe Arnbiarnarson, IV. 3. 2; 3. 4-5; 8. 2.

Þórsteinn Trumbo-bein, IV. 11. 8.

Þórsteinn Úgæfa Helgason, II. 24. 6.

Þórsteinn Upplendingr, IV. 18. 2.

Þórsteinn Vífl (al. Vífill), IV. 19. 3.

Þórsteinn Víga-Styrsson, II. 7. 5-6.

Þórsteinn Þiocko-bein, IV. 2. 1.

Þórsteinn Þórgeirsson Goða, III. 18. 1.

Þórsteinn Þórgeirsson  Hoeggven-kinna, III. 21. 3.

Þórsteinn Þórgilsson, p. 328. 12.

Þórsteinn Þórkelsson, p. 642. 39.

Þórsteinn Þorskabítr Þórolfsson, II. 7. 5; 10. 4-5; 22. 8: Gen. A. 36:
Th. 7. 4-5; 9. 1; 9. 3; 10. 1; 10. 3; 11. 1-4.

Þórsteinn Þróndarson, II. 2. 1.

Þórsteinn Þurs, III. 18. 2.

Þórsteinn Þynning Ceallacsson, II. 16. 1.

Þórunn (al. Iðunn) Arnardótter or Arnarnese, III. 14. 10.

Þórunn Ásbiarnardótter Myrkárskalla, Gen. A. 33.

Þórunn Ásgeirsdótter Austmannaskelmes, V. 12. 2.

Þórunn en Auðga Ketilsdótter ens Einhenda, V. 9. 2; 9. 7 (here called
his mother).

Þórunn Blá-kinn Nafar-Helgadótter, III. 12. 2.

Þórunn Brún Brynjolfsdótter (al. Þórgilsdótter), IV. 18. 1-2.

Þórunn Eyverska, V. 9. 11.

Þórunn Groeningja-Riúpa, I. 4. 2: V. 10. 3.

Þórunn Gunnarsdótter, II. 15. 14: Lib. 5. 1.

Þórunn, d. of Helga Ásgeirsdótter, V. 3. 2.

Þórunn Hyrna Ketilsdótter, I. 4. 5: III. 13. 3; 14. 1; 14. 3:
Gen. A. 32: Th. 1. 4.

Þórunn Illogadótter, II. 20. 9.

Þórunn, m. of Iósteinn, I. 7. 11.

Þórunn Iósteinsdótter (al. Hólmsteinsd.), I. 7. 8: V. 7. 6.

Þórunn Iaorundardótter, V. 6. 2.

Þórunn Ketilsdótter Kiolfara, V. 16. 4.

Þórunn Leiðolfsdótter Kappa, IV. 7. 2; 18. 1.

Þórunn Skáldkona Surtzdótter, Gen. B. 5.

Þórunn Skallagrímsdótter, I. 9. 5.

Þórunn Steinolfsdótter, II. 4. 13.

Þórunn Þióðolfsdótter, III. 20. 1.

Þórunn Þórbiarnardótter, I. 8. 3.

Þórunn Þórgeirsdótter, I. 7. 11.

Þórunn Þórgilsd., see Þórunn Brún.

Þórunn Þórkellsdótter Bundinfóta, V. 6. 3.

Þórunn Þóroddzdótter, III. 14. 12.

Þórunn Þórolfsdótter OExna-Þóressonar, III. 14. 31.

Þórunn (al. Þórný) Þórsteinsdótter, III. 17. 2: V. 7. 9: Gen. A. 31;
34.

Þórunn at Þórunnar-hálsom, V. 8. 3.

Þórunn, of Þórunnar-holt, II. 3. 6.

Þórunn á Þórunnartoftom, II. 16. 2.

Þórunn Þórvallzdótter Holbarka, IV. 5. 4.

Þórvaldr Ánason, II. 13. 1.

Þórvaldr Ásgeirsson, III. 4. 1: V. 13. 3: Gen. B. 4-5: p. 595.

Þórvaldr Asvallzson, II. 12. 1; 28. 3.

Þórvaldr Ceartansson, II. 15. 9 b: III. 6. 4: Gen. B. 2.

Þórvaldr Crókr, see Þ. Krókr.

Þórvaldr Croppin-skegge, Lib. 3. 2.

Þórvaldr Galmansson, III. 14. 12.

Þórvaldr Gizorarson, III. 14. 19: IV. 14. 4: Gen. B. 15: Þorl. 12. 3:
Pol. 6. 3; 7. 2; 8. 2; 14. 2; 14. 7: Gm. 611.

Þórvaldr Halldórsson í Garpsdal, II. 18. 4.

Þórvaldr Hialtason, III. 10. 1-2; 20. 3.

Þórvaldr Holbarke Haofða-Þórðarson, III. 11. 2.

Þórvaldr Holbarke Ísroeðarson, IV. 5. 4.

Þórvaldr Hvíte Þórðarson Víkingssonar, II. 20. 8; 23. 2.

Þórvaldr Ísleifsson, III. 6. 4: Lib. 9. 2: Cr. 10. 1: Hv. 1. 2:
Io. 3. 3: p. 596.

Þórvaldr Ketilsson, Gen. A. 27.

Þórvaldr Krókr Þóresson, III. 14. 10; 15. 6: p. 312. 11.

Þórvalldr Oddzson, III. 4. 2.

Þórvaldr Óláfsson Belgs, II. 18. 3.

Þórvaldr Orgoðe Halldórsson, II. 29. 3: Gen. B. 11 (Steingrímsson).

Þórvaldr Ormsson Galmanssonar (or Galmansson), III. 14. 12.

Þórvaldr, priest, Pol. 6. 2.

Þórvaldr Refsson, Cr. 2. 3.

Þórvaldr Síðo-Hallzson, see Þórvarðr.

Þórvaldr Skeggjason, V. 9. 10-11: Gen. B. 10: Cr. 8. 2: Io. 1. 1.

Þórvaldr Snorrason or Vatzfirðe, II. 15. 9 b: Gen. B. 2.

Þórvaldr Steingrímsson, see Þórvaldr Orgoðe.

Þórvaldr Teitzson, II. 3. 7.

Þórvaldr Tinnzson, II. 7. 2.

Þórvaldr Tinteinn Eysteinsson, III. 6. 6.

Þórvaldr Tungo-Oddzson, I. 10. 3: Lib. 5. 1.

Þórvaldr enn Veile, Cr. 4. 4.

Þórvaldr enn Víðfaorle Coðránsson, III. 6. 6: Cr. 1. 1-2; 1. 7; 8. 7;
9. 1: Thorv. 1, &c.

Þórvaldr Þiðrandason, Gen. A. 19; B. 15.

Þórvaldr, f. of Þórbiaorn, II. 7. 3.

Þórvaldr Þórkelsson, Pol. 15. 2.

Þórvaldr Þórsteinsson Torfa, IV. 3. 4.

Þórvaldr í Þórvallzdale, III. 14. 9; 14. 13.

Þórvaldr Þórðarson, see Þórvaldr Hvíte.

Þórvaldr Þórgrímsson Brækiss, II. 3. 4.

Þórvaldr Þórmóðsson Goða, II. 8. 1.

Þórvara Ozorardótter, Cr. 1. 5.

Þórvarðr Ásgeirsson, II. 3. 5.

Þórvarðr Knappe, Io. 4. 1.

Þórvarðr Kraóko-nef, Gen. B. 15.

Þórvarðr Ornolfsson í Crist-nese, III. 14. 15; 14. 18.

Þórvarðr (al. Þórvaldr) Síðo-Hallzson, IV. 14. 4: Gen. A. 19;
B. 10; 15.

Þórvarðr Spak-Baoðvarsson, Cr. 1. 2; 1. 3; 2. 3; 8. 7: Thorv. 7:
p. 414.

Þórvarðr Súgandason, V. 16. 7.

Þórvarðr frá Urðom, III. 12. 8.

Þórvarðr Þórbiarnarson ens Svarta, I. 8. 3.

Þórvarðr Þórgeirsson Goða, III. 18. 1: Gm. 607-9.

Þórvarðr of Þórvarðarstaðer, II. 2. 2.

Þórvé Þórmóðardótter Skafta, V. 13. 2.

Þórviðr Freyviðarson, II. 4. 5.

Þórviðr í Skagafirðe, III. 7. 6.

Þórviðr Ulfarsson, V. 10. 5; 12. 1-2.

Þórvaor Ormsdótter, Gen. B. 14.

Þórvaor Þórbiarnardótter, I. 7. 8.

Þórvaor Þórmóðardótter Skafta, V. 13. 2: Gen. A. 16.

Þráinn Sigfússon, Gen. A. 6: Nj. 367. 8.

Þráinn Svarte-þurs, III. 14. 5.

Þrase í Skógom Þórolfsson Hornabriótz, IV. 9. 4: V. 2. 2.

Þraslaug Egilsdótter, Gen. A. 10.

Þraslaug Eyvindardótter, IV. 19. 4.

Þraslaug Onundardótter, IV. 15. 6; 18. 3.

Þraslaug Þórsteinsdótter Titlings, IV. 18. 1: Gen. A. 10; 25.

Þróndr enn Gamle Harallzson Hilditannar, Gen. A. 1.

Þróndr í Gaoto, I. 2. 3.

Þróndr Mióbeinn, II. 17. 4-5; 18. 7: III. 15. 10.

Þróndr Miok-siglande Biarnarson, III. 13. 2-3; 15. 1; 15. 4: V. 12. 5.

Þróndr Narfason, III. 12. 7.

Þróndr Nefja, II. 2. 1.

Þróndr Þóresson, II. 4. 14.

Þraostr berserkr, IV. 18. 2.

Þraostr Egilsson, IV. 2. 2.

Þraostr Hermundarson Holkins, II. 30. 3.

Þróttolfr Véfroeðarson, III. 6. 3.

Þuríðr, see Þóríðr.




Æ


Ægileif Hrólfsdótter, III. 18. 2.

Ægileif Þórsteinsdótter Craoflo-sonar, II. 21. 1.

Æsa Ceallacsdótter or Svíney, II. 12. 2; 16. 1.

Æsa Gestzdótter Oddleifssonar, V. 15. 1.

Æsa Hákonardótter Griótgarðzsonar, V. 14. 1: Gen. B. 7.

Æsa Hrólfsdótter Rauðskeggs, III. 17. 2: V. 7. 9 (Ása).

Æsa en Liósa, II. 17. 1.

Æsa Liótolfsdótter Goða, III. 12. 1.

Æsa Oddleifsdótter, II. 21. 1.

Æsa Ófeigsdótter, V. 4. 5.

Ævarr enn Gamle Þórgeirsson, IV. 5. 1; 5. 3; 8. 1; 10. 7.

Ævarr Ketilsson Hello-flaga, III. 6. 1; 8. 1: V. 17. 2.

Ævarr Vémundarson Orðlokars, Gen. A. 1.




Ö


Ö-, O-, Ø-, OE-, AO-, see O-.





SECTION II

II. NAMES OF PLACES.






A


Á (= Árboer), on the w. side of Outer Rangaó (S.), V. 9. 3.

Á, in Síða, east of Skaftaó (S.), IV. 18. 1.

Á (= Þvátt-aó), Alftafiaorðr (E.), Cr. 4. 1.

Aðal-vík, N. from Ísafiaorðr (W.), II. 17. 6; 27. 1.

Agða-nes, at the entrance to Trondhjem Firth, Norway, I. 7. 7: V. 9. 7.

Agðer (dat. Ogðom), the southern part of Norway, II. 17. 3; 18. 1;
24. 8: III. 13. 2; 14. 10; 20. 1: V. 8. 2; 16. 5: Mant. 5. 6.

Akra-fell, Akranes (S.), I. 7. 2.

Akra-nes, between Hvalfiaorðr and Borgarfiaorðr (S.), I. 7. 2, 4,
10; 11. 1, 3: II. 2. 1: Od. 3. 2.

Akrar (dat. Okrom), between Hitaó and Alftaó, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 15.

Alfgeirs-veller, W. of Svartaó, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 7. 5.

Alfs-nes, Kialarnes (S.), I. 4. 4.

Alfs-óss, ? the mouth of Olfus-aó (S.), V. 16. 5.

Alfta-fiaorðr, E. of Þórsnes, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 5. 4; 8. 1;
11. 3-4, 6; 12. 2: Th. 7. 1; 8. 1-2: Ch. p. 636.

Alfta-fiaorðr, Ísafiaorðr (W.), II. 24. 8.

Alfta-fiaorðr enn noerðre, S. of Berofiaorðr (E.), IV. 11. 7: Cr. 4. 1:
p. 418.

Alfta-fiaorðr enn syðre, S. of prec. (E.), I. 3. 3: IV. 7. 2; 12. 1:
Cr. 4. 2.

Alfta-fiaoðr, Eystrebygð, Greenland, II. 12. 9.

Alfta-nes, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 12-13; 20. 5.

Alfta-nes, S. of Reykjavík (S.), I. 7. 1; 11. 3: V. 16. 12.

Alfta-ver, W. of Kúðafliót (S.), IV. 17.

Alft-aó, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 11, 13, 15.

Áll (?), Norway, III. 6. 6: Cr. 1. 1.

Almanna-fliót, E. of Síða (S.), IV. 15. 6.

Alm-daler (?), Norway, IV. 3. 1.

Almenningar enir vestre, Ísafiaorðr (W.), II. 17. 6.

Álost, S. Haorðaland, Norway, V. 4. 1.

Alviðra, Dýrafiaorðr (W.), II. 33. 2; 24. 4.

Alviðra, N. of Bergen, Norway, V. 11. 6.

Ambáttar-aó, Vatznes, Húnaflóe (N.), III. 3, 1.

Ána-brecka, beside Langaó, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 8.

Andakíls-aó, Borgarfiaorðr (S.), I. 7. 11.

Andar-kelda, under Skarð, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 18. 6.

Ár (dat. Ám), Gautland, Sweden, III. 13. 1.

Armenia, Mant. 6. 1.

Arnallz-staðer, Skriðodalr (E.), IV. 5. 3.

Arnar-boele, Norðrárdalr (W.), II. 3. 10.

Arnar-fell, in the centre of Iceland, III. 8. 9.

Arnar-fiaorðr, S. of Dýrafiaorðr (W.), II. 21. 1, 2, 5-6: III. 14. 9.

Arnar-holt, Stafaholltz-tunga, Mýrar (W.), II. 3. 7: IV. 8. 2.

Arnar-hváll, near Reykjavík (S.), I. 3. 7.

Arnar-hváll, on E. side of Eyjafiarðaraó (N.), III. 14. 4.

Arnar-nes, on the W. side of Eyjafiaorðr (W.), III. 14. 11.

Arnar-stakks-heiðr, W. Skaptafells-sýsla (S.), Cr. 8. 2.

Arnar-þúfa, OExarfiaorðr (N.), III. 22. 1.

Arnbiargar-loekr, Þverárhlíð, Mýrar (W.), II. 3. 5.

Arneiðar-staðer, Fliótzdalr (E.), IV. 4. 2.

Ár-nes, Árnesþing (S.), Hv. 4. 7.

Arnlaugs-fiaorðr, Eystrebygð, Greenland, II. 12. 9.

Áróss (now Aarhus), Denmark, Cr. 3. 1.

Ásar, in Skaftártunga, N. of Kúðafliót (E.), IV. 18. 1.

Ásbjarnar-nes, Víðedalr, Vestrhóp (N.), III. 5. 13: Gen. B. 2.

Ásbiarnar-staðer, Ornolfsdalr, Hvítársíða (W.), II. 2. 4.

Ásbiarnar-vík (?), III. 19. 4.

Ásgarðz-hólar (= Hólar), Soelingsdalr (W.), Gen. B. 13.

Ásgautz-staðer, Flóe (S.), V. 11. 2.

Ásgeirs-aó, Víðedalr (N.), III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 4-5, 11.

Áshildar-mýrr, Skeið (S.), V. 12. 4.

Áskels-haofðe, between Steins-loekr and Þiórsaó (S.), V. 9. 10.

Ásmundar-leiðe, near Oxl, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 10.

Ásolfs-skále (Eastern), under Eyjafiaoll (E.), I. 7. 4: Ch. p. 632.

Ásolfs-skále (Western), under Eyjafiaoll (S.), I. 7. 4.

Áss, Hialtadalr (N.), Cr. 1. 3: Thorv. 7: p. 414 ('Ridge').

Áss, between Rauðaloekr and Þiórsaó (S.), V. 9. 11: Hv. 1. 2: Io. 1. 1.

Áss enn Syðre, S. of Hvitaó, NE. of Reykjaholt (S.), I. 10. 7.

Áss (= Óddsás), Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 12.

Atla-haugr, Flóe (S.), V. 12. 2.

Atley in Fjaler, Norway, II. 5. 5: V. 11. 2.

Auðar-tofter, Hvammsfiaorðr (W.), II. 14. 8.

Auð-brecka, Horgárdalr (N.), III. 14. 14.

Auðkúlo-staðer, Svínadalr (N.), III. 5. 14.

Auðnir, under Eyjafiaoll (S.), V. 3. 2.

Auðolfs-staðer, Lángadalr (N.), III. 6. 2.

Auðolfs-staðer, Tiornes (N.), III. 20. I n.

Auðs-staðer, N. Reykjadalr (S.), I. 10. 5.

Auð-staðer, see Oddz-staðer.

Auðunar-staðer, Víðedalr (N.), III. 4. 1.

Auga-staðer, between Auðstaðer and Giljar, N. Reykjadalr (S.),
I. 10. 6.

Aurriða-ár-óss, Hvammsfiaorðr (W.), II. 14. 8.

Aurriða-aó, beside Akranes, Borgarfiaorðr (W.), I. 7. 2, 9.

Austfirðer, the eastern coast of Iceland, I. 2. 2; 3. 3; 7. 3:
IV. 9. 2: V. 1. 1: Lib. 3. 2: Cr. 4. 2: Pol. 7. 1: Od. 1. 1, 3.

Austfirðinga-fiórðungr, the East Quarter of Iceland, IV. 1; 19. 5:
V. 17. 2: Lib. 10. 6: Cr. 8. 7; 10. 6: Hv. 2. 10: Io. 1. 1.

Austr-vegr, the Baltic and adjoining countries, III. 2. 2.

Axlar-hage, Blaondohlíð (N.), III. 8. 4.




B


Backa-holt or Backár-holt, West of Olfusaó (S.). IV. 15. 3.

Baðz-garðr, Land, Outer Rangárveller (S.), Od. 6. 4.

Balka-staðer, Hrútafiaorðr (N.), II. 30. 1.

Ballar-aó, on Skarðsstraond, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), I. 11. 4; 17. 6;
20. 6.

Bár, = Bari, Italy, Hv. 2. 20; 5. 3.

Barð, NW. corner of Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 21. 4.

Barð, Fliót, E. of Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 11. 2; 12. 2: Cr. 2. 3.

Bárðar-dalr, Skialfandafliót (N.), III. 17. 1: IV. 15. 5.

Bárðar-gata, Fliótzhverfe (E.), III. 17. 1: IV. 15. 5.

Barða-straond, N. of Breiðafiaorðr (W.), I. 6. 8: II. 20. 8; 21. 1:
Th. 7. 3: Cr. 5. 5. See Straond.

Barðz-nes, N. of Gerpir, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 10. 4.

Barðz-vík, Hornstrander (W.), II. 17. 6.

Baugs-staðer, Flóe (S.), V. 7. 1.

Becans-staðer, between Berjadalsaó and Aurriða-aó (S.), I. 7. 9.

Beigaðar-hváll, Svínavatn (N.), III. 5. 11.

Beigalde, between Gufaó and Langaó, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 6.

Belgs-dalr, Saurboer, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 18. 3.

Belgs-holt, S. of Borgarfiaorðr (S.), Cr. 5. 6.

Belgs-staðer, Belgsdalr (W.), II. 18. 3.

Berg, Norway, IV. 12. 1: Gen. B. 15.

Berg-hlíðer, at the E. end of Barðastraond (W.), II. 21. 1.

Berg-hylr, Hrunamannahreppr (S.), V. 13. 4.

Berg-Þórs-hváll, Landeyjar (S.), V. 3. 5: Gen. A. 8: Nj. p. 367.

Berja-dals-aó, N. of Garðar, Akranes (S.), I. 7. 9.

Bero-fiaorðr, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 11. 6.

Bero-fiaorðr, W. of Króksfiaorðr, Breiðafiaordr (W.), II. 18. 6; 21. 6.

Bero-víkr-hraun, W. of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 6. 1; 7. 1, 3.

Bersa-staðer, between Midfiaorðr and Hrutafiaorðr (N.), II. 30. 1.

Bersa-staðer, SW. of Lagarfliót, (E.), IV. 3. 6.

Berserks-eyrr, on Kolgrafafiaorðr, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 2.

Berytho, = Beyrout, Io. 13. 6.

Bialla-brecka, old name of Þrasa-staðer (S.), V. 2. 2.

Biarga-óss, see Braga-óss.

Biark-ey, Hálogaland, Norway, III. 12. 6: Gen. B. 13.

Biarma-land, N. of Russia, II. 17. 2.

Biarnar-dalr, Mýrar (W.), II. 3. 11.

Biarnar-fiaorðr, Hornstrander (W.), II. 28. 1.

Biarnar-fiaorðr, N. of Steingrímsfiaorðr (W.), II. 20. 7; 29. 2.

Biarnar-haofn, W. of Þórsnes (W.), II. 9. 2, 3: Gen. B. 13: Th. 6; 7.

Biarnar-nes, Hornstrander (W.), II. 28. 1.

Biarna-staðer, in Litla Tunga (W.), II. 1. 2.

Biarneyja-flóe, round Biarneyjar in Breiða­fiaorðr (W.), II. 17. 4.

Bíldz-fiall, S. of Ulfliótz-vatn (S.), V. 16. 1.

Bíldz-aó, Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 2.

Biaorg (? = Nesbiaorg), Vestrhóp (N.), III. 3. 1.

Biorgvin, = Bergen, Norway, I. 1. 1 n.: Hv. 1. 11; 5. 9: Thorl. 8. 2:
Pol. 3. 6.

Biskups-tunga, between Brúaraó and Hvítaó (S.), V. 14. 3: Gen. A. 14.

Bitra, = Bitrofiaorðr, Húnaflóe (W.), II. 17. 6; 29. 5.

Blanda, a river flowing into Húnafiaorðr (N.), III. 6. 1.

Blá-serkr, Greenland, II. 12. 3.

Blá-skeggs-aó, near the bend of Hval­fiaorðr (S.), I. 6. 8; 7. 7.

Blá-skógar, W. and N. of Olfusvatn (S.), I. 9. 1: V. 14. 2: Lib. 3. 2.

Blesa-staðer, Norðrárdalr (W.), II. 3. 8.

Blaondo-dalr, SE. of Húnafiaorðr (N.), III. 5. 8, 16.

Blaondo-hlíð, E. of Iaokulsaó, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 8. 4.

Blaondo-kvísler, the small streams forming the Blanda (N.), III. 7. 8.

Blaondo-óss, the mouth of the Blanda, Húnafiaorðr (N.), III. 6. 1:
Hv. 4. 3.

Blundz-vatn, near Boer, Borgarfiaorðr (S.), I. 9. 5.

Baoðmóðs-hraun (or -horn), Síða (E.), IV. 16. 2.

Baoðmóðs-tunga, Síða (E.), IV. 16. 2.

Baoðolfs-kytja, Tiornes (N.), III. 20. 1.

Baoðvars-dalr, Vápnafiaorðr (E.), III. 22. 1: IV. 3. 2.

Baoðvars-hólar, E. of Miðfiaorðr (N.), III. 1. 2.

Baoðvars-holt, Lón (E.), IV. 13. 3.

Baoðvars-tofter, Flóe (S.), V. 12. 2.

Bólstaðar-aó, Blaondohlið, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 8. 7.

Bólstaðr, Eastern Fliótzhlíð (S.), V. 5. 1.

Borð-eyre, W. of Hrútafiaorðr (W.), II. 30. 3, 4.

Borg, Mýrar (W.), I. 8. 1: II. 4. 1.

Borg, Víðedalr (N.), p. 323.

Borgar-dalr, E. of Alftafiaorðr (W.), II. 11. 4: Th. 8.

Borgar-fiaorðr, S. of Mýrar (W. and S.), I. 8. 1; 9. 4: II. 13. 6;
20. 4: III. 5. 12: Lib. 5. 1: Cr. 1. 4; 5. 1: Hv. 1. 11; 3. 3:
Thorl. 12. 2: Od. 3. 1.

Borgar-fiaorðr, E. of Héraðzflóe, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 8. 2.

Borgar-haofn, SW. of Hornafiaorðr (E.), IV. 11. 8; 14. 3.

Borgar-holt, on the N. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 9. 2-3: Th. 6.

Borgar-holt, on the S. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 8.

Borgar-hraun, to the N. of Mýrar (W.), I. 8. 1: II. 5. 3.

Borgar-loekr, near Biarnarhaofn (W.), II. 9. 2: Thors. 7.

Borgar-sandr, the SW. shore of Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 8. 3.

Borgund, an island in Sunnmoerr, Norway, V. 2. 1.

Bótar-skarð, near Mosfell, Grímsnes (S.), V. 14. 4.

Botn, Hvalfiaorðr (S.), I. 7. 1.

Braga-óss (? Biarga-óss), S. of Húnafiaorðr (N.), III. 3. 1.

Brannz-loekr, S. of OExarfiaorðr (N.), Cr. 4. 3.

Bratta-hlíð, Eiriksfiaorðr, II. 12. 8.

Brattz-holt, Flóe (S.), V. 11. 2.

Brautar-holt, Kialarnes (S.), I. 7. 1.

Brá-vaollr, E. Gautland, Sweden, IV. 18. 7.

Brecka (= Fagra-brecka), Hrútafiaorðr (W.), II. 30. 4.

Brecka, S. of Onundarfiaorðr (W.), II. 24. 1.

Brecka (= Syðre Brecka), S. of Skagafiaorðr (N.), p. 612.

Breckor, Fliótzhlíð (S.), V. 4. 6.

Breckor, Flókadalr (S.), I. 9. 5.

Breiða-bólstaðr, Fellzhverfe (E.), IV. 14. 3.

Breiða-bólstaðr, Fliótzhlíð (S.), V. 4. 2; 7. 1: Io. 1. 1; 3. 1;
5. 1: Od. 2. 2.

Breiða-bólstaðr, Pappýle (S.), IV. 14. 8.

Breiða-bólstaðr, N. Reykjardalr (S.), I. 6. 6; 10. 1.

Breiða-bólstaðr, Síða, Lib. p. 305. 11.

Breiða-bólstaðr, Skógarstraond, S. of Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 7. 2;
11. 8; 12. 2.

Breiða-bólstaðr, Saockolfsdalr (W.), II. 15. 6.

Breiða-bólstaðr, Vestrhóp (N.), Io. 7. 1 n.

Breiða-fiarðar-daler (W.), Gen. A. 35.

Breiða-fiaorðr (W.), I. 2. 3: II. 5. 2; 10. 1; 12. 4; 14. 6; 17. 3;
20. 4; 21. 6: III. 21. 3: Gen. B. 12: Th. 4; 6; 9; 10: p. 277:
Lib. 2. 1; 5. 1; p. 305. 15.

Breiða-mýrr (Eastern), Flóe (S.), V. 10. 1.

Breiða-mýrr (Western), Flóe (S.), V. 11. 2.

Breiða-mýrr, S. of Einarsstaðer, Reykjadalr (N.), III. 19. 3.

Breið-ár-sandr, NE. of Ingolfshaofðe (E.), IV. 14. 10.

Breiða-vík, SW. of Borgarfiaorðr, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 8. 3.

Breiða-vík, on the S. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 11. 6.

Breið-dalr, Austfirðer (E.), III. 14. 10: IV. 6. 1; 11. 2, 5-6:
Gen. A. 29: Hr. 1.

Breiðfirðinga-fiórðungr, the Western Quarter of Iceland, Lib. 10. 6.

Breið-aó, Breiðár-sandr (E.), IV. 14. 10: Gen. B. 15.

Brenna, Reykjardalr (S.), II. 1. 2.

Brenningr, Breiðavík, S. of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 12.

Bretland, = Britain, Prol.: Gen. A. 19.

Brimar, = Bremen, Germany, Mant. 3. 2: Cr. 3. 1: Hv. 1. 3: Io. 1. 2.

Brimils-veller, E. of Fróðaó, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 5.

Brimnes-skógar, on the SE. side of Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 8. 9.

Brians-loekr, Vatzfiaorðr (W.), I. 2. 3.

Brok-ey, off Skógarstraond, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 12. 1.

Brúna-haugr, Skeið (S.), V. 12. 3.

Bruna-staðer, in or near Ulfsdaler (N.), III. 12. 4.

Brynjo-dalr, Hvalfiaorðr (S.), I. 6. 7-8: II. 21. 1.

Brynjo-dals-aó, Hvalfiaorðr (S.), I. 3. 8.

Búðar-dalr, Skarðsstraond, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 17. 3.

Búðar-dals-aó, Búðardalr (W.), Gen. B. 9.

Búland, W. of Skaftaó, N. of Ásar (E.), IV. 17. 5: 18. 3.

Búlannz-haofðe, on the N. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 5, 8.

Búlannz-nes, S. of Berofiaorðr (E.), IV. 11. 6.

Bulka-rúm (?), II. 4. 14.

Bulungar-vík, Ísafiarðardiúp (W.), II. 24. 5.

Búr-fell, Grímsnes, II. 21. 1: V. 15. 1.

Byrgis-vík, Hornstrander (W.), II. 29. 1: Gen. B. 5.

Bægis-aó, Horgárdalr (N.), III. 14. 19-20.

Boejar-sker, W. of Rosmhvalanes (S.), V. 16. 3.

Boer, Borgarfiaorðr (S.), I. 7. 6: Cr. 10. 9: Hv. 1. 11: Od. 3; 4.

Boer, Hrútafiaorðr (W.), II. 4. 3; 30. 1-2.

Boer, Lón (E.), IV. 13. 1, 3.




C


Calls-brecka, Calmans-aó, &c, see under K.

Cantaraborg, = Canterbury, England, Cr. 3. 1.




D


Dala-laond, = Breiðafiarðar-daler (W.), II. 14. 8: Thors. 6. 3.

Daler, the dales SW. of Arnarfiaorðr (W.), II. 21. 6.

Daler, = Breiðafiarðar-daler (W.), II. 5. 4; 15. 7, 11; 19. 3:
III. 1. 1; 6. 5: Gen. B. 11; 12: Lib. 5. 1.

Daler, to the W. of Óláfsfiaorðr (N.), III. 12. 6.

Dalr ( = Stóridalr), E. of Markarfliót (S.), Gen. A. 2.

Dals-fiaorðr á Fiaolom, Sunnmoerr, Norway, I. 3. 1.

Dals-mynne, Norðrárdalr (W.), II. 3. 11 (M).

Danmaork, = Denmark, I. 1: III. 2. 2: V. 2. 1: Lib. 7. 7; 10. 11:
Cr. 3. 3; 8. 8; 9. 2; 10. 3: Hv. 1. 12; 3. 3. 5; 4. 3: Pol. 3. 2;
7. 3: Io. 2. 1; 4. 1; 6. 1; 7. 2.

Deilðar-ey, Hvammsfiaorðr (W.), II. 16. 2.

Deilðar-gil, beside Hvítaó (S.), I. 10. 7.

Deilðar-hialle, near Másstaðer, Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 16.

Deilðar-aó, Fliótzhlíð (S.), V. 3. 5; 5. 1.

Deilðar-aó, Haofðastraond, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 9. 2.

Digra-nes, S. of Borg, in Borgarfiaorðr (W.), II. 4. 10.

Digra-nes, E. of Sandvík (E.), IV. 1. 3; 2. 3.

Dimunar-vágr, off Daogorðarnes, Breiðafi[a]orðr (W.), II. 12. 2.

Diúpa-dalr, Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 15. 7: Gen. B. 16: Cr. 1. 5.

Diúpa-fiaorðr, W. from Þorskafiaorðr (W.), II. 15. 9b; 20. 2:
Gen. B. 2.

Diúp-aó, Blaondohlíð, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 8. 8.

Dnepr, Dnapr, the R. Dnieper, Cr. 9. 1.

Dofrar, Goðbrandsdaler, Norway, IV. 12. 1.

Daogorðar-nes, Skarðsstraond, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 7. 6; 14. 7.

Daogorðar-aó, Hvammsfiaorðr (W.), II. 14. 8; 16. 1: Th. 6. 3.

Dránga-land, beside Drángar, Hornstrander (W.), II. 28. 3.

Drángar, Horgárdalr (N.), III. 14. 15.

Drángar, Hornstrander (W.), II. 12. 1; 26. 4 (?); 28. 3.

Drángar, Skógarstraond (W.), II. 12. 2.

Drángar (= Lóndrángar), Snæfellznes (W.), II. 6. 2.

Dránga-vík, Hornstrander (W.), II. 28. 3.

Drángs-hlíð, under Eyjafiaoll (S.), V. 2. 2.

Drápo-hlíð, S. of Þórsnes, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 9. 3: Th. 7. 3;
8. 3.

Drífande, Síða (E.), IV. 16. 2; 18. 1.

Drit-sker, W. of Þórsnes (W.), II. 10. 3: Th. 4; 10.

Dropn, for Dnopr (see Dnepr), the Dnieper, Thorv. 7.

Drumb-Oddz-staðer, Biskups-tungor (S.), V. 14. 6.

Dufans-dalr, Arnarfiaorðr (W.), II. 21. 6; 22. 3.

Dufgus-dalr, Miklaholts-hreppr (W.), Gen. B. 13.

Dúfo-nefs-skeið, in the centre of Iceland, III. 8. 9.

Dufþacs-holt, N. of Þveraó (S.), V. 4. 2; 7. 4.

Dufþacs-skor, Vestmanna-eyjar, I. 3. 7.

Dums-haf, the Arctic Ocean, III. 14. 1.

Dur-holma-óss, Mýdalr (E.), Cr. 8. 2.

Dyflinn, Dublin, I. 1; 8. 3: II. 14. 1.

Dyflinnar-skíre, the country round Dublin, II. 14. 1.

Dyn-skógar, Álftaver (E.), IV. 18. 4.

Dýra-fiaorðr, Vestfirðer (W.). II. 20. 8; 22. 6-7; 23. 1; 25. 2.

Dyr-hólar, Mýdalr (E.), Gen. A. 24.




E


Egils-staðer, Vápnafiaorðr (E.), IV. 2. 2.

Eið, S. of Þrandheimr, Norway, p. 615.

Eið, Vestmanna-eyjar, I. 3. 7.

Eilífs-dals-aó, Kiós (S.), I. 6. 5.

Eilífs-fell, W. of Skagafiaorðr, Thorv. 5-6.

Einars-fiaorðr, Greenland, II. 12. 9.

Einars-haofn, Flóe (S.), V. 12. 2, 4.

Einars-sker, Selasund, Hvammsfiaorðr (W.), II. 9. 3.

Einars-staðer, S. of Helgastaðer, Reykjadalr (N.), III. 19. 3.

Einhyrnings-maork, E. of Fliótzhlið (S)., V. 5. 1.

Einkunner, N. of Borg, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 7.

Eiriks-ey, Eiriksfiaorðr, Greenland, II. 12. 3.

Eiriks-ey, Eystrebygð, Greenland, II. 12. 3.

Eiriks-fiaorðr, Greenland, II. 12. 3, 8, 10: Lib. 6. 1.

Eiriks-holmar, on Cape Farewell, Greenland, II. 12. 3.

Eiriks-staðer, Haukadalr (W.), II. 11. 1.

Eiriks-staðer, OExney (W.), II. 12. 2.

Eiriks-vágr, OExney (W.), II. 12. 2.

Eldgríms-staðer, Grímsdaler (W.), II. 3. 5.

Eldo-eið, S. of Naumdalr, Norway, V. 4. 1.

Eliiða-ár-óss, E. of Reykjavík (S.), V. 14. 1.

Elliða-ey, off Daogorðarnes (W.), II. 17. 3.

Eng-aó, (?) near Þiórsaó (S.), V. 6. 2.

Engi-nes, Hornstrander (W.), II. 28. 3.

England, I. 1; 6. 5 n.; 8. 1: II. 4. 1: III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5:
Lib. 9. 4; 10. 12: Hv. 1. 11-12; 5. 13: Thorl. 4. 2; 15. 1: Pol. 1. 4.

Enne, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 3-5.

Esjo-berg, Kialarnes (S.), I. 6. 4; 10. 1: II. 2. 1; 20. 6: p. 327. 16.

Eske-fiaorðr, Reyðarfiaorðr (E.), IV. 5. 2; 10. 7.

Eske-holt, between Gliúfraó and Gufaó (W.), II. 4. 5.

Espe-hóll (Northern), on Eyjafiarðaraó (N.), III. 15. 6.

Espe-hóll (Southern), on Eyjafiarðaraó (N.), III. 14. 10; 15. 6;
21. 1: Gen. A. 25: Mant. app.

Eyfirðinga-fiórðungr, the Northern Quarter of Iceland, Lib. 10. 6:
Cr. 4. 3 n.

Eyja-dals-aó, on the W. side of Bárðardalr (N.), III. 17. 1, 4.

Eyja-fiarðar-aó, running into Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 4; 15. 10;
19. 1.

Eyja-fiarðar-straond, on the E. side of Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 15. 12.

Eyja-fiaoll, SE. of Markarfliót (S.), I. 7. 4: Mant. 1: Hv. 2. 17.

Eyja-fiaorðr, a frith and district (N.), II. 22. 2; 24. 6: III. 14. 2:
Gen. A. 25; 32: Lib. 2. 1; 5. 3; p. 305. 20: pp. 312. 6; 329. 7:
Nj. p. 368: Cr. 2. 4; 4. 3: Hv. 2. 9; 4. 4: Pol. 4. 1.

Eyjar, = Færeyjar, I. 2. 2.

Eyjar, = Landeyjar(S.), Od. 6. 2.

Eyjar, = Western Isles, I. 4. 5.

Eyjar, = Vestmanna-eyjar, I. 3. 7: V. 3. 7: Cr. 8. 2 n.

Eyjar-aó, E. of Hiaorleifs-haofðe (E.), IV. 17. 1; 18. 4.

Eyja-sandr, Landeyjar (S.), V. 3. 7: Cr. 8. 2.

Eyja-sund, off Daogorðarues, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 14. 7.

Eyja-sveit ( = Landeyjar), the district between Markarfliót and Þveraó
(S.), v. 7. 3.

Eyrar, E. of Olfusár-óss (S.), III. 15. 4: V. 7. 2; 12. 4: Io. 7. 7 n.

Eyrar-backe, E. of Olfusár-óss (S.), II. 5. 8: V. 11. 3.

Eyrar-hváls-odde, Dýrafiaorðr (W.), p. 319. 3.

Eyrar-land, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 1.

Eyrr ( = Narfeyre), Alptafiaorðr (W.), II. 11. 1, 4; 18. 6: Th. 7. 1.

Eyrr, Hvalfiaorðr (S.), I. 6. 5; 9. 6.

Eyrr ( = Rafnseyre), N. of Arnarfiaorðr (W.), II. 20. 8; 22. 2.

Eyrr ( = Ondorðeyrr), Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 5;  9. 4:  Gen. B. 13:
Th. 7; 8.

Eyrr,  N. of Onundarfiaorðr (W.), II. 24. 4.

Eystre-bygð, Greenland, II. 12. 3.

Eystre-dalr, E. and S. of Goðdaler (N.), III. 8. 5.

Ey-vík (or Vík), Grímsnes (S.), Cr. 4. 4 n.

Eyvindar-aó, runs into Lagarfliót, IV. 5. 2, 4.

Eyvindar-fiaorðr, Hornstrander (W.), II. 28. 4.

Eyvindar-hólar, S. of Eyjafiaoll (S.), V. 7. 2.




F


Fábeins-aó, N. of Daogorðarnes (W.), II. 17. 3, 6.

Fagra-brecka, W. of Hrútafiaorðr (W.), II. 30. 3.

Fagra-dalr, Saurboer, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 18. 1: Gen. B. 9.

Fagra-dalr, Vápnafiaorðr (E.), IV. 3. 2.

Fagra-dalr, W. of Haofðabrecka (E.), IV. 18. 5.

Fagra-dals-ár-óss, Saurboer (W.), II. 18. 5.

Fagra-dals-aó, Breiðdalr (E.), IV. 11. 6.

Fagra-skógr, (?) between Kaldaó and Hitaó (W.), II. 5. 5.

Fagra-vík, Langanes (E.), IV. 1. 1.

Fá-skrúðs-fiaorðr, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 10. 8.

Faxa-óss, the mouth of Faxafiaorðr, I. 2. 3; 6. 3.

Feldar-holmr, off Daogorðarnes, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 9. 3.

Fell, above Breiðaó (E.), IV. 14. 10: Gen. B. 10.

Fell, Kollafiaorðr, Húnafloe (W.), II. 29. 4.

Fell (= Staðarfell), N. of Hvammsfiaorðr (W.), II. 16. 1-2.

Fellz-hverfe, Lítla Hérað (E.), IV. 14. 3.

Fellz-múle, W. of Laxaó, Skialfande (N.), III. 17. 2.

Fellz-múle, Land, Outer Rangárveller (S.), Od. 6. 3.

Fellz-skógar, N. of Hvammsfiaorðr (W.), II. 16. 2.

Ferstikla, on the N. side of Hvalfiaorðr (S.), I. 7. 7.

Fiaðr-aó, falls into Skaptaó, W. of Kirkjoboer (E.), IV. 16. 1.

Fialer ( = Fialafylke), W. of Norway, I. 3. 1: II. 5. 5: V. 10. 3;
11. 2.

Fiall, = the Alps, I. 1.

Fiarðar-horn, at the head of Hraunsfiaorðr, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 2.

Fífla-veller, Þelamaork, Norway, V. 8. 1.

Finna-fiaorðr, N. of Miðfiaorðr (E.), IV. 1. 2.

Finn-maork, N. of Norway and Sweden, II. 17. 5.

Fiaoll, = Eyjafiaoll (S.), V. 7. 2.

Fión, Fyn (Funen), Denmark, Hv. 2. 20.

Firðir (= Firða-fylke), in W. of Norway, II.2. 1: III. 13. 2: Mant. 5.

Fiske-loekr, near the head of Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 15. 11;20. 2.

Fisk-aó, runs into Eastern Rangaó (S.), V. 7. 9.

Fitjar, on Stordö, S. of Bergen, Norway, I. 7. 11: III. 17. 2.

Flánga-staðer, near Kirkjoboer, Síða (E.), IV. 7. 2.

Flata-tunga, between Norðraó and Jaokulsaó, Skagafiaorðr (N.),
III. 8. 6.

Flat-ey, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 17. 4-5.

Flat-ey, off Flateyjardalr (N.), p. 612.

Flat-eyjar-dalr, W. of Skialfande (N.), III. 16. 5.

Fliót (Norðlinga-fliót), runs into upper Hvitaó, II. 1. 1; 2. 1.

Fliót, Hornstrander (W.), II. 25. 1.

Fliót, = Markarfliót (S.), V. 3. 5; 6. 1; 7. 3.

Fliót, NE, of Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 6. 6.

Fliót, = Skialfandafliót (N.), III. 20. 3.

Fliótz-dalr, Hvítársíða (W.), II. 2. 2.

Fliótz-dalr, the valley of Lagarfliót (E.), IV. 4. 1; 5. 2; 10. 7:
Cr. 4. 2.

Fliótz-hlíð (S.), V. 4. 7 n.; 7. 1: Gen. A. 5; 6: Cr. 4. 4: Hv. 4. 10:
Thorl. 1. 1: Io. 1. 1.

Fliótz-hverfe, E. of Síða (E.), III. 17. 1: IV. 15. 5.

Fliótz-aó, = Lagarfliót (E.), IV. 4. 1.

Flóe (S.), I. 7. 12: V. 5. 2 (S); 7. 2.

Flóka-dalr, Borgarfiaorðr (S.), I. 6. 5; 9. 3: II. 20. 3.

Flóka-dalr, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 11. 5.

Flóka-dals-aó, Borgarfiaorðr (S.), I. 9. 3.

Flóka-dals-aó, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 12. 2.

Flóka-vágr, Shetland, I. 2. 3.

Flóka-varðe, on the borders of Haorðaland and Rogaland, Norway,
I. 2. 3.

Flugo-mýrr, S. of Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 8. 8-9: p. 603.

Fnióska-dals-aó, Fnióskadalr (N.), II. 15. 12.

Fola-fótr, between Hestfiaorðr and Skaotofiaorðr (W.), II. 25. 2.

Fors, on Langaó, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 11.

Fors, on Holmkelsaó (W.), II. 7. 3.

Fors, N. of Skaptár-óss (E.), IV. 15. 6.

Fors, between Fiskaó and Eastern Rangaó, (S.), V. 7. 9.

Fors-ár-skógar, Gen. B. 15.

Fors-fiaorðr, Arnarfiaorðr (W.), II. 22. 5.

Fors-aó, Borgarfiaorðr (S.), I. 8. 3.

Fors-aó, Kiós (S.), I. 6. 7-8.

Fors-aó, Skagastraond (N.), III. 6. 5.

Fors-aó, Sólheimasandr (S.), V. 2. 2.

Forsoelo-dalr, S. of Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 7.

Fors-vaollr, W. of Iaokulsaó (E.), IV. 3. 4.

Frakkland, = France, Lib. 9. 7.

Framnes, Flóe (S.), V. 11. 3.

Friðleifs-dalr, Sléttahlíð (N.), III. 11. 4.

Fróð-ár-óss, the mouth of Fróðaó (W.), II. 7. 4.

Fróð-aó, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 4; 22. 8.

Fúlaloekr (= Iaokulsaó), Sólheimasandr (S. and E.), IV. 9. 3; 19. 1.

Fura, (?) Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 9.

Fyllar-loekr (al. Fúld-), Flóe (S.), V. 11. 2, 4.

Fyrileif, Ránríke, Norway, Hv. 4. 3.

Færeyjar, the Faroe Islands, I. 1; 2. 2: II. 6. 2; 14. 5.




G


Galmans-straond, on the W. side of Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 8.

Galtar-hamarr, Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 2.

Garðar, Akranes (S.), I. 7. 3: Od. 3; 4.

Garðar (= Garðaríke), Russia, III. 9. 1.

Garðars-holmr, the oldest name of Iceland, I. 2. 1.

Garps-dalr, Gilsfiaorðr (W.), II. 18. 4.

Gata, in the Færöes, I. 2. 3.

Gaular, in Fialer, Norway, I. 3. 2: V. 9. 1; 10. 1-2.

Gaulverja-boer, Flóe (S.), V. 10. 1.

Gautland, Sweden, III. 5. 1; 13. 1-2: Gen. B. 5: Lib. 10. 1: Io. 6. 1;
10. 1.

Gautz-dalr, Laxárdalr (N.), III. 6. 3.

Geira-staðer, W. of Mývatn (N.), III. 21. 3.

Geira-staðer, NW. of Húnavatn (N.), III. 21. 3.

Geira-staðer, Króksfiaorðr (W.), III. 21. 3.

Geirhilldar-vatn, Shetland, I. 2. 3.

Geir-land, Síða (E.), IV. 16. 3.

Geir-landz-aó, runs into Skaptár-óss (E.), IV. 15. 6; 16. 1, 3.

Geirmundar-staðer, Sæmundarhlíð (N.), III. 7. 1.

Geirmundar-staðer, Skarðsstraond (W.), II. 17. 6; 20. 4.

Geirmundar-staðer, Steingrímsfiaorðr (W.). II. 17. 6.

Geirmundar-vágr, Skarðsstraond (W.), II. 17. 3.

Geirolfs-gnúpr, Hornstrander (W.), II. 28. 2.

Geirs-hlíð, Flókadalr (S.), I. 9. 6.

Geirs-holmr, Hvalfiaorðr (S.), I. 6. 6.

Geirs-aó, Borgarfiaorðr (S.), I. 9. 4.

Geirvaor, Álptafiaorðr (W.), II. 11. 6.

Geirþiófs-fiaorðr, Arnarfiaorðr (W.), II. 22. 5.

Geitland, between Hvítaó and Geitaó (S.), I. 8. 2; 11. 1: II. 1. 2:
Hv. 1. 1.

Gerpir, N. of Reyðarfiaorðr (E.), IV. 10. 5.

Gersoeme, name of a field, II. 24. 2.

Giá-backe, Þingvaollr (S.), pp. 358-9; Cr. 8. 3.

Giá-hamarr, Þingvaollr (S.), p. 355.

Gil, E. of Reykjaholt (S.), I. 10. 6.

Gil-hage, NW. of Ýrarfell, Svartárdalr (N.), III. 7. 7.

Gilj-aó, E. of Lagarfliót (E.), IV. 4. 3.

Gilj-aó, near Mælifell (N.), III. 7. 6; 8. 1.

Gilj-aó, E. of Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 5; 6. 6: Mant. 6: Cr. 1. 1:
Hv. 1. 11.

Gils-backe, Hvítársíða (W.), III. 2. 3: Cr. 8. 7: Od. 3. 2.

Gils-fiaorðr, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 18. 4.

Gils-aó, runs into Grímsaó S. of Vallanes (E.), IV. 5. 2-4.

Gísla-vatn, (?) Hellisdalr (W.), II. 3. 8.

Glaum-steinn, Halland, Sweden, Mant. 5.

Gler-aó (Northern and Southern), Kræklingahlíð (N.), III. 15. 5.

Gliúfr-aó, runs into Norðraó, Borgarfiaorðr (W.), II. 4. 4-5.

Gliúfr-aó, runs into Iaokulsaó, Skagafiaorðr, III. 8. 10; 9. 3.

Glóða-feykiss-aó, runs into Iaokulsaó, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 8. 8.

Gnúpar, Fliótzhverfe (E.), III. 17. 1; IV. 7. 3 (M.); 15. 5; 18. 2.

Gnúpar, Olfus (S.), V. 16. 5.

Gnúpar, N. of  OExarfiaorðr (N.), p. 613.

Gnúp-aó, Hnappadals-sýsla (W.), II. 5. 2.

Gnúpo-dalr, the valley of Gnúpaó (W.), II. 5. 6.

Gnúpo-fell, E. of Eyjafiarðaraó (N.), II. 24. 6: III. 14. 11; 15. 10;
18. 2; 21. 1.

Gnúpr, between Breiðdalsvik and Berofiaorðr (E.), IV. 11. 5.

Gnúpr, Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 6.

Gnúp-verja-hreppr, a district between Þiórsaó and Laxaó (S.), V. 13. 2.

Goð-daler, S. of Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 6. 3; 7. 8; 8. 1; 12. 1:
IV. 3. 1: V. 11. 4; 17. 2: Gen. A. 28; 33: Cr. 1. 2; 6. 1.

Goðlaugs-haofðe, S. of Bitrofiaorðr (W.), II. 29. 5.

Goðlaugs-vík, between Bitrofiaorðr and Hrútafiaorðr (W.), II. 29. 5.

Gollbera-staðer, Southern Reykjadalr (S.), I. 9. 1.

Gaongo-skarð, W. of Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 12. 2.

Gaongo-skarðz-aó, runs into Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 6. 2; 7. 2.

Gota-loekr, on the N. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 3.

Grana-staðer, on Digranes (W.), II. 4. 10.

Grene-trés-nes, W. of Þorskafiaorðr (W.), II. 20. 1.

Grene-vík, E. side of Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 16. 2-3.

Grenjaðar-staðer, Laxárdalr, Skialfande (N.), III. 19. 5.

Grenmarr, E. of Liðandesnes, Norway, V. 8. 2.

Grettes-geil, on Laxaó (S.), V. 13. 2.

Grímars-staðer, N. of Hvanneyre, Borgarfiaorðr (S.), II. 4. 9.

Grímolfs-fit, -loekr, -staðer, near Borg, Borgarfiaorðr (W.), II. 4. 9.

Grímolfs-vaotn, Ísafiaorðr (W.), II. 25. 2.

Gríms-ár-óss, the mouth of Grímsaó in Borgarfirth (W.), II. 26. 4:
III. 5. 2: V. 12. 2.

Gríms-dalr, Mýrar, Borgarfiaorðr (W.), II. 4. 2.

Gríms-ey, N. of Eyjafiaorðr (N.), p. 613.

Gríms-ey, at the mouth of Steingrímsfiaorðr (W.), II. 5. 1-2.

Gríms-gil, West of Húsafell on Hvítaó (S.), I. 10. 6.

Gríms-nes, a district SE. of Olfusvatn (S.), II. 21. 1: V. 14. 3;
15. 1: Gen. A. 15: Cr. 4. 4.

Gríms-aó, a tributary of Hvítaó, Borgarfiaorðr, I. 8. 2; 9. 2, 4:
Od. 4. 2.

Gríms-aó, Flóe (S.), V. II. 2.

Gríms-aó, E. of Hiaorleifs-haofðe (E.), IV. 18. 6.

Grinda-loekr, III. 6. 3.

Grinda-vík, S. of Rosmhvalanes (S.), IV. 17. 2: V. 16. 8: Ho. 4.

Grindill, Flókadalr, III. 12. 2.

Grindr, near Tungan lítla, Borgarfiaorðr (W.), II. 1. 1.

Griótgarðz-haugr, S. of Agðarnes, Norway, I. 7. 7.

Griót-aó, in the W. part of Fliótzhlíð, Gen. A. 6.

Griót-aó, a tributary of Hitaó, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 13.

Griót-aó, E. of Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 9. 2, 4.

Griót-Vallar-múle, Saurboer, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 18. 1, 3.

Grísar-tunga, between Gliúfraó and Norðraó, Borgarfiaorðr (W.),
II. 4. 2.

Graof, Mýrar (W.), II. 3. 6.

Gró-nes, between Diúpafiaorðr and Gufufiaorðr (W.), II. 20. 2.

Groena-land, see Groenland.

Groena-vatn, S. of Mývatn (N.), III. 21. 2.

Groenland, = Greenland, I. 1: II. 12. 5-10; 19. 4; 28. 3: V. 16. 11:
Lib. prol. 6. 1: Cr. 8. 1: Hv. 1. 3: Pol. 7. 1.

Grund, Eyjafiarðardalr (N.), III. 15. 6.

Grund, under Iorundarfell, Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 4.

Grunna-fiaorðr, Leirárvágar, between Akranes and Melar (S.), II. 2. 1.

Guðdaler, see Goðdaler.

Guf(u)-ár-óss, the mouth of Gufu-aó (W.), II. 4. 1: Cr. 3. 5.

Gufu-fiaorðr, W. of Diúpafiaorðr, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 20. 2, 6.

Gufu-nes, E. of Seltiarnarnes (S.), II. 20. 3.

Gufu-aó, or Guf-aó, runs into Borgarfiaorðr from the North (W.),
I. 8. 1: II. 4. 6; 20. 4.

Gufu-skálar, E. side of Rosmhvalanes (S.), II. 20. 3.

Gufu-skálar, on Gufaó, Borgarfiaorðr (W.), II. 20. 4.

Gufu-skálar, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 20. 4.

Gunnars-holt, between the two Rangár (S.), V. 7. 2: Gen. A. 5:
Od. 6. 1.

Gunnbjarnar-sker, off Greenland, II. 7. 1; 12. 2; 25. 4.

Gunnlaugs-staðer, between Hvítaó and Þveraó (W.), II. 3. 1.

Gunnolfs-fell, -vík, N. of Finnafiaorðr (E.), IV. 1. 1.

Gunnolfs-aó, W. of Óláfsfiaorðr (N.); III. 12. 8.

Gunn-steinar, Flateyjardalr (N.), III. 16. 5.

Gunnsteins-staðer, Langadalr (N.), III. 6. 2.

Gygjar-spors-aó, Hrafnsfiaorðr (W.), II. 26. 6.

Gyldar-hage, Hrunamannahreppr (S.), V. 13. 6.




H


Haddingja-dalr, Hallingdal, in central Norway, II. 5. 1.

Hafgríms-fiaorðr, Greenland, II. 12. 9.

Hafnar-fiaoll, on the S. side of Borgarfiaorðr, I. 8. 1.

Hafnar-fiaorðr, S. of Alptanes (S.), I. 2. 3.

Háfr, near the mouth of Þiórsaó (S.), V. 9. 11: Cr. 8. 2: Thorl. 4. 7.

Hafra-fell, NW. of Króksfiaorðr (W.), II. 18. 5; 19. 1.

Hafra-nes, S. of Reyðarfiaorðr (E.), IV. 10. 6.

Hafrs-fiaorðr, Rogaland, Norway, II. 4. 3; 17. 3; 24. 3; 29. 1:
III. 5. 2: V. 12. 5; 16. 4: Gen. B. 5.

Hafrs-aó, Sólheimasandr (E.), IV. 9. 3; 18. 8; 19. 1.

Hafrs-loekr (al. Háfs-), a tributary of Langaó, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 8.

Hafs-botn, in the Arctic Ocean, I. 1.

Hafs-fiarðar-ey, S. of Eyjahreppr, Snæfellznes (W.), p. 328. 12.

Haga-garðr, near Hlíð, Biskupstungor (S.), V. 14. 7.

Haga-nes, Fliót, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 12. 1-2.

Hagbarðz-holmr, Hálogaland, Norway, III. 16. 5.

Hage, Barðastraond (W.), II. 26. 4.

Hage, Árskógs-straond, Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 11.

Hage, Eystrehreppr (S.), V. 13. 3.

Hage enn forne (= Fornhage), Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 14.

Haka-skarð, near Mosfell, Grímsnes (S.), V. 14. 4.

Hákonar-hella, S. of Bergen, Norway, Mant. 5.

Hákonar-staðer, W. of Iaokulsaó (E.), IV. 3. 5.

Halland, Sweden (formerly under Denmark), Mant. 5.

Hallar-múle, Þverárhlíð (W.), II. 3. 1.

Hallbiarnar-vaorðor, W. of Skialdbreið (S.), II. 26. 2: V. 15. 2.

Hallgeirs-ey, Landeyjar (S.), V. 4. 7 n.; 7. 3.

Hallkels-hólar, Grímsnes (S.), V. 15. 2.

Hallkels-staðer, Hvítársíða (W.), I. 7. 10: II. 2. 1.

Hallorms-staðer, E. of Lagarfliót (E.), Od. 1. 3.

Hallsteins-nes, W. of Þorskafiaorðr (W.), II. 20. 1: Thors. 6.

Háloga-land, a district in the N. of Norway, II. 11. 1; 24. 5; 26. 4:
III. 12. 6; 14. 17; 16. 2; 20. 3: IV. 18. 5: V. 5. 1: Gen. A. 32;
B. 13: Cr. 6. 3.

Háls, S. of Diúpadalr, Eyjafaorðr (N.), III. 15. 7.

Háls enn ytre, Dýrafiaorðr (W.), II. 22. 6.

Háls, Hnióskadalr (N.), p. 607.

Hálsa-land, Borgarfiaorðr (S.), I. 10. 1.

Hálsar, Dýrafiaorðr (W.), II. 23. 7.

Hálsar, beside Vatzdalr, Húnafiaorðr (N.), III. 5. 12.

Hálsgraof, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 9. 3.

Hamar-kaupangr, on Lake Mjors, Heiðmaork, Norway, Pol. 3. 3.

Hamarr, Vestmanna-eyjar (S.), V. 3. 7.

Hamarr, Þverárhlíð (W.), II. 3. 4.

Hamars-aó, Hamarsfiaorðr (E.), IV. 12. 3.

Hamrar, on the E. side of Hornafiaorðr (E.), IV. 14. 6.

Hamrar, (?) near Hiaorleifs-haofðe (E.), IV. 18. 6.

Hámundar-staðer, on the W. side of Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 2, 8.

Hámundar-staðer, perh. between Skaptaó and Tungofliót (E.), Gen. A. 5.

Hana-tún, former name of Marboele (N.), III. 14. 21.

Hardns-vatn, see Hiarðar-vatn.

Háreks-staðer, Norðrárdalr (W.), II. 3. 10.

Hásteins-haugr, Flóe (S.), V. 12. 2.

Hásteins-sund, Flóe (S.), V. 11. 2.

Haugar, between Gliúfraó and Norðraó (W.), II. 4. 4.

Hauga-vað, Flóe (S.), V. 12. 2.

Haugr, near Biarkey, Sweden, III. 12. 1, 7.

Haugs-nes, Þórsnes (W.), Th. 9.

Hauka-dalr, Biskupstungor (S.), V. 13. 4, 6: Gen. B. 10: Mant. 1. 7:
Lib. 9. 2; 10. 10: Cr. 4. 3; 10. 8: Hv. I. 2; 3. 1, 7: Io. 3.

Hauka-dalr, Breiðafiarðardaler (W.), II. 12. 1.

Hauka-dalr, S. of Dýrafiaorðr (W.), II. 22. 7-8.

Hauka-dals-aó, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 15. 9.

Hauka-gil, Vatzdalr (N.), Cr. 2. 1.

Hauks-staðir (al. -grafir), Langadalr, III. 6. 3.

Hávarar-lón, Melrakkaslétta (N.), III. 22. 3.

Héðens-haofðe, E. of Skialfande (N.), III. 6. 6; 18. 1.

Hefne, Norðmoerr, Norway, III. 5. 1: V. 9. 7.

Hegg-gerðis-múle (al. Hregg-), Hornafiaorðr (E.), IV. 14. 3.

Hegra-nes, S. of Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 8. 2.

Hegra-nes-þing, Cr. 2. 6.

Heiða-boer, W. of Olfusvatn (S.), V. 16. 3.

Heiðr (Mosfells-heiðr), E. of Reykjavík (S.), I. 3. 7-8: IV. 13. 1:
V. 14. 1.

Heina-bergs-aó, W. of Hornafiaorðr (E.), IV. 14. 7, 9.

Hekla, Heklo-fell, = Hecla, the famous volcano (S.), Hv. 2. 20; 5. 13:
Pol. 7. 6; 15. 2.

Helga-fell, on Þórsnes, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 10. 2: Gen. A. 36;
B. 14: Th. 4; 11: Cr. 1. 2.

Helga-hváll, Skeið (S.), V. 12. 4.

Helga-sker, off Skriðinsenne (W.), II. 30. 4.

Helga-staðer, Reykjadalr, Skialfande (N.), III. 17. 2; 19. 1.

Helga-vatn, S. of Breiðabólstaðr, Vatz-dal (N.), III. 5. 3, 6.

Helga-vatn, Þverárhlíð (W.), II. 3. 2, 4, 12 n.

Helkundo-heiðr, W. of Finnafiaorðr (E.), IV. 1. 1.

Hellir Surtz, N. of Geitland (S.), III. 11. 2.

Hellis-dalr, Norðrárdalr (W.), II. 3. 8.

Hellis-fiaorðr, SE. of Norðrfiaorðr, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 10. 4.

Hellis-fitjar, near Surtz-heller (S.), I. 10. 2.

Hellis-hraun, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 12; 6. 1.

Hengi-fors-aó, runs into Fliótzaó, S. of Lagarfliót (E.), IV. 4. 1;
5. 2.

Heraðs-vað, Skáney, Sweden, Pol. 3. 4.

Herfurða, Saxony, Mant. 3. 2: Cr. 10. 1: Hv. 1. 2: Io. 1. 2; 3. 3.

Hergils-ey, in Breiðafiaorðr, NW. of Flatey (W.), II. 17. 4.

Herjolfs-dalr, Vestmanna-eyjar (S.), V. 3. 7.

Herjolfs-fiaorðr, Greenland, II. 12. 9.

Herjolfs-haofn, Faxafiaorðr (S.), I. 2. 3.

Herjolfs-nes, Greenland, II. 12. 9.

Hernar, Haorðafylke, Norway, I. 1.

Hest-fiaorðr, Ísafiaorðr (W.), II. 25. 2.

Hest-loekr, Grímsnes (S.), Cr. 4. 4.

Heydala-laond, Breiðdalr (E.), IV. 11. 4.

Heydaler, Breiðdalr (E.), Gen. A. 29.

Hialla-nes, the northernmost promontory of Dýrafiaorðr (W.),
II. 23. 1, 3.

Hialle, Olfus (S.), V. 9. 8: Hv. 1. 1.

Hialta-dalr, runs into Skagafiaorðr from the SE. (N.), III. 9. 4;
10. 1: Gen. B. 15: Mant. 4. 2: Cr. 1. 3; 10. 7: Hv. 2. 9: Io. 7. 1.

Hialt-doela-laut, between Þorskafiaorðr and Steingrímsfiaorðr (W.),
III. 10. 2.

Hialtland, = Shetland, I. 1; 2. 3: III. 16. 1.

Hiarðar-holt, Laxárdalr (W.), II. 23. 2: Gen. B. 13: Cr. 10. 9.

Hiarðar-nes, E. of Vatzfiaorðr, Barða­straond (W.), II. 17. 6; 20. 9.

Hiarðar-vatn (cod. Hardns-vatn), near Hraunsfiaorðr, Snæfellznes
(W.), II. 8. 4.

Hierosalem, = Jerusalem, Lib. 10. 12: Io. 13. 5.

Hildis-ey, Landeyjar (S.), V. 7. 23.

Hildis-haugr, near Kirkjoboer, Síða (E.), IV. 16. 5.

Hiaorleifs-haofðe, Skaptafellsþing (E.), I. 3. 7: Od. 1. 3.

Hirtir, = S. Kilda, p. 613.

Hísar-gafl, Haorðafylke, Norway, I. 3. 2.

Hising, in Gautelfr, on the borders of Norway and Sweden, Gen. B. 16.

Hit-ár-dalr, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 3, 14; 11. 8; 30. 1: Hv. 4. 10-11:
Pol. 6. 3; 14. 1: Od. 4. 2.

Hitar-nes, N. of Hitaó (W.), Cr. 5. 2.

Hit-aó, Hitárdalr, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 13-15; (Hitar-aó) 5. 5:
Cr. 5. 1, 3.

Hlað-hamarr, Hvalfiaorðr (S.), I. 7. 1.

Hleiðrar-garðr, W. of Eyjafiarðaraó (N.), III. 16. 1: Gen. A. 31; 34.

Hlíð, Fliótzdals-hérað (E.), p. 606.

Hlíð, = Fliótzhlíð (S.), V. 5. 2 (S); 6. 2; 7. 2; 8. 6.

Hlíð, = Iaokulsárhlíð, N. of Iaokulsaó (E.), IV. 3. 4.

Hlíð, = Sæmundarhlíð, S. of Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 6. 6.

Hlíð en ýtre, = Úthlíð, Biskupstungor (S.), V. 14. 7: Gen. A. 14.

Hlíð, Þorskafiaorðr, II. 17. 4.

Hliðar, Vestfold, Norway, III. 13. 2.

Hlíðar-ende, Fliótzhlíð (S.), IV. 7. 2; 18. 1: V. 4. 4; 5. 2; 7. 1-2,
8: Gen. A. 5; 11: Thorl. 1. 1.

Hlíðar-laond, Biskupstungor (S.), V. 14. 7.

Hlaoðo-vík, W. of Horn (W.), II. 35. 1.

Hlym-daler (cod. Hringdaler), Norway, Mant. 5. 1.

Hlymrek(e), Limerick, Ireland, II. 19. 2.

Hnióska-dalr (or Fnjóskadalr), Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 16. 1.

Hniósk-aó, runs from the SE. into Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 16. 2.

Hnit-biaorg (al. Hvít-), Kiarradalr, II. 2. 4-5.

Hof, Álftafiaorðr (E.), IV. 12. 2.

Hof, Goðdaler (N.), III. 8. 1.

Hof, Hialtadalr (N.), III. 7. 1; 10. 1; 11. 2.

Hof, Kialar-nes (S.), I. 5. 1.

Hof, Pappýle, IV. 14. 8.

Hof, N. of Eastern Rangaó (S.), V. 4. 2; 6. 2; 7. 8: Gen. A. 1:
Cr. 1. 2.

Hof (Hofslaond), Vápnafiaorðr (E.), IV. 2. 2; 3. 1: Gen. A. 28:
Mant. 4. 2: Hv. 2. 1.

Hof (Hofsland), Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 3, 12. 13.

Haofða-brecka, W. of Hiaorleifs-haofðe (E.), IV. 17. 2: Gen. A. 22.

Haofða-brecko-land (E.), Od. 2. 3.

Haofð-ár-sandr, W. of Hiaorleifs-haofðe (E.), IV. 18. 5.

Haofða-straond, E. of Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 5. 12; II. 1.

Haofðe, on the E. side of Eyjafiaorðr (N.), II. 15. 13: III. 16. 2:
IV. 2. 3.

Haofðe, = Hiaorleifs-haofðe (E.), IV. 18. 3, 6-7.

Haofðe, Haofðastraond (N.), III. 6. 6; 7. 1; 9. 2; 11. 5: Gen. A. 32:
Cr. 2. 2.

Haofðe (or Haofða-laond), Biskupstungor (S.), V. 7. 2; 12. 4; 14. 8:
Cr. 10. 1.

Haofð-aó, W. of Hiaorleifs-haofðe (E.), Od. 2. 3.

Hóf-garðar, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 11.

Haofn, Melasveit, Borgarfiaorðr (S.), I. 7. 11, 13: (?) II. 9. 3:
Cr. 5. 6.

Hofs-fell, near the head of Hornafiaorðr (E.), IV. 14. 6.

Hof-staðer, Northern Reykjadalr (S.), I. 11. 3.

Hof-staðer, in the North of Blaondohlíð, III. 8. 10.

Hof-staðer, Þorskafiaorðr (W.), II. 17. 5.

Hof-staðer, Þórsnes, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 10. 1: Th. 4; 9.

Hófs-teigr, W. of Iaokulsaó (E.), IV. 3. 5.

Hofs-vágr, W. of Þórsnes, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 10. 1: Th. 4.

Haogna-staðer, Þverárhlíð (W.), II. 3. 2.

Haoko-staðer, Norðrárdalr, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 8. 7.

Hólar (= Hrepp-hólar), Hrunamanna­hreppr (W.), V. 13. 5; 15. 2.

Hólar, = Reykjahólar (W.), II. 19. 1.

Hólar, Vestrhóp (N.), III. 3. 1.

Hólar (the bishop's See), Hialtadalr (N.), Mant. 1. 5; 4. 1: Lib. 9. 1;
10. 11; Epil.: Cr. 2. 3; 10. 7-8: Hv. 1. 7; 2. 9; 3. 5, 13; 4. 9;
5. 1, 9, 13: Thorl. 12. 4: Pol. 6. 3; 7. 3; 12. 2: Io. 7. 1; 8. 2;
9. 1; 12-13: pp. 592-4, &c.

Hóll, (?) Norway, V. 16. 1.

Holmgarðr, = Novgorod, Russia, III. 2. 1: Cr. 3. 4.

Holmkels-aó, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 3.

Holmr enn iðre, Akranes (S)., I. 7. 2, 4, 6; 11. 3.

Holmr (Holmslaond), Hitárdalr (W.), II. 4. 3; 30. 1.

Holmr, = Níðarholmr, Cr. 6. B* (p. 395).

Holms-látr, Skógarstraond (W.), II. 11. 7; 12. 4; 13. 1.

Holms-laond, between Fiskaó and Rangaó (S.), V. 7. 9.

Holms-aó, runs from the NW. into Skaptaó (E.), IV. 17. 5; 18. 3-4.

Holt, under Eyjafiaoll (S.), I. 7. 4; V. 3. 3.

Holt (Holta-laond), Flóe (S.), V. 7. 2; 11. 2; 12. 1.

Holt, Holkamýrar (N.), Thorv. 7.

Holt, Síða (E.), IV. 16. 2.

Holt, Fliót, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 11. 4.

Holta-staðer, Langadalr (N.), III. 6. 4.

Haorða-dalr, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 15. 3.

Haorða-dals-aó, Haorðadalr (W.), II. 15. 1.

Haorða-hólar, Hvítársíða (S.), II. 3. 3.

Haorða-land, a province of Norway, I. 2. 3: II. 24. 3: III. 19. 1:
V. 2. 2: Gen. A. 38; B. 15.

Hoerga-eyrr, Vestmanna-eyjar (S.), Cr. 8. 2.

Hoerg-ár-dalr, on the W. side of Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 8,
14-15, 19.

Hoerg-ár-dals-aó, = Hoergaó (N.), III. 14. 9.

Hoerg-aó, runs from the SW. into Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 13.

Haorgs-holt, Hnappadals-sýsla (W.), II. 5. 7.

Haorgs-land, Síða (E.), pp. 417-18.

Horn (et eystra), between Hornafiaorðr and Lón (E.), I. 1; 2. 3:
IV. 9. 3; 13. 3; 14. 3, 5.

Horn (et vestra), Hornstrander (W.), II. 17. 6; 25. 1; 27. 2.

Hornafiarðar-straond, the coast at Hornafiaorðr (E.), IV. 14. 5.

Hornafiaorðr, W. of Horn (E.), IV. 14. 3: V. 1. 1.

Horn-strander, the NE. coast of the West Quarter, II. 12. 1.

Haoscullz-ár, on the N. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 3.

Haoscullz-ey, in Breiðafiaorðr, NW. of Þórsnes (W.), Th. 11. 4.

Haoscullz-loekr, in the S. of Grímsnes (S.), V. 14. 3.

Haoscullz-staðer, Laxárdalr (W.), II. 20. 7.

Haoscullz-vatn, near Búrfell (N.), III. 18. 2.

Hrafnista, off  Hálogaland, Norway, I. 8. 1: II. 22. 2: V. 4. 1:
Gen. A. 31.

Hrafnkels-dalr, Iaokulsdalr (E.), IV. 6. 3.

Hrafnkels-staðer, E. of Lagarfliót (E.), Gen. A. 30.

Hrafns-fiaorðr, Iaokulfirðer (W.), II. 26. 6.

Hrafns-fiaorðr, Greenland, II. 12. 3, 9.

Hrafns-haugr, Flóe (S.), V. 12. 2.

Hrafns-tofter, on Outer Rangaó (S.), V. 4. 2.

Hranafall (?), II. 3. 5.

Hrana-staðer, Hálsasveit, Borgarfiaorðr (S.), I. 10. 6.

Hraun, on Hvítaó, Borgarfiaorðr (S.), II. 1. 1.

Hraun (= Berserkja-hraun), on the N. side of Snæfellznes (W.),
II. 8. 5.

Hraun, beside Saxahváll, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 1.

Hraun-dalr (2), between Alptaó and Hitaó, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 13.

Hraun-gerðe, Flóe (S.), I. 7. 12; Hv. 1. 2.

Hraun-gerðinga-hreppr, Flóe (S.), I. 7. 12: V. 11. 5.

Hraun-haofn, N. of Melrakka-slétta (N.), III. 22. 4.

Hraun-haofn, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 11.

Hrauns-áss, Hálsasveit, Borgarfiaorðr (S.), I. 11. 3: II. 2. 1.

Hrauns-fiaorðr, on the N. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 2-3; 9. 2:
Th. 6.

Hrauns-holtz-loekr, Alftanes (S.), V. 16. 12.

Hrauns-loekr, W. of Þiórsaó, Flóe (S.), V. 12. 1.

Hreðo-vatn, N. of Norðraó, Mýrar (W.), II. 3. 12.

Hregg-gerðís-Múle, see Hegg-.

Hreiðars-gerðe, near Laugarbrecka, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 6. 2.

Hringa-ríke, a district in E. Norway, I. 4. 5: II. 9. 1: III. 13. 3:
Mant. 5.

Hring-staðer, Vestrhóp (N.), III. 3. 1.

Hrip, on Kaldár-óss (W.), II. 5. 3.

Hrísar, Flókadalr, Borgarfiaorðr (S.), I. 9. 6.

Hrísey, Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 2, 4.

Hróars-loekr, runs from the NE. into Outer Rangaó (S.), V. 4. 2;
8. 7; 11. 6.

Hrolleifs-dalr, on the E. side of Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 5. 12; 11. 3.

Hrolleifs-dals-aó, Hrolleifsdalr (N.), III. 11. 1.

Hrómundar-staðer (= Kallsbrecka), Mýrar (W.), II. 3. 1.

Hrossa-garðr, NE. of Haofðabrecka (E.), IV. 17. 2.

Hruna-manna-hreppr, the district between Laxaó and Hvitaó (S.),
V. 13. 4-6.

Hrúta-fiarðar-straond, the (eastern) side of Hrúta-fiaorðr (N.),
III. 1. 1.

Hrúta-fiaorðr, Húnaflóe (W. and  N.), I. 9. 2: II. 4. 3; 30. 1-3:
III. 1. 2; 5. 2, 16; 20. 5.

Hrútz-staðer, Kambsnes, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 15. 10: Gen. A. 35.

Húna-vatn, S. of Húnafiaorðr (N.), III. 5. 9; 21. 3.

Húna-vatz-þing, the  moot, or moot-district of Húnavatn (N.),
III. 5. 16.

Hunda-dalr, SE. of Hvammsfiaorðr (W.), II. 15. 5.

Húns-nes, on W. side of Þistilfiaorðr (N.), III. 22. 6.

Húsa-fell, Borgarfiaorðr (W.), Gen. B. 14.

Húsa-garðr, on Outer Rangaó (S.), V. 9. 5.

Húsa-vík, between Breiðavík and Loð­mundar-fiaorðr (E.), IV. 9. 1.

Húsa-vík, on the E. side of Skialfande (N.), I. 2. 1: III. 17. 2;
18. 2; 19. 1.

Hval-eyrr, beside Hafnarfiaorðr (S.), I. 2. 3.

Hval-fiarðar-straond, N. of Hvalfiaorðr (S.), I. 7. 7: Od. 3. 2.

Hval-fiaorðr, between Akranes and Kialarnes (S.), I. 3. 8: II. 1. 1.

Hváll (= Arnar-hváll), E. of Eyjafiarðar-aó (N.), III. 15. 10.

Hváll (= Stórolfs-hváll), between Þveraó and Eastern Rangaó (S.),
V. 4. 7 n.; 7. 4.

Hval-látr, E. of Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 16. 3.

Hval-látr, Keflavík (W.), II. 21. 4.

Hvals-ey, Greenland, II. 12. 10.

Hvals-eyjar-fiaorðr, Greenland, II. 12. 10.

Hváls loekr, Fliótzhlíð (S.), V. 4. 7 n.

Hvals-nes-skriðor, between Hamarsfiaorðr and Alftafiaorðr (E.),
IV. 11. 3, 8.

Hval-vatz-fiaorðr, between Eyjafiaorðr and Skialfande (N.), III. 16. 4.

Hvammr, Blaondohlíð, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 8. 11.

Hvammr, Hvammsfiaorðr (W.), II. 5. 8; 14. 8; 15. 10; 20. 2; 23. 2:
III. 11. 2: Gen. A. 1 n.: Th. 6; 9: Lib. epil.: Cr. 2. 2.

Hvammr, S. of Hvalfiaorðr, Kiós (S.), I. 6. 7.

Hvammr, Mýdalr (E.), IV. 18. 1.

Hvammr, Norðrárdalr (W.), II. 4, 5.

Hvammr, Olfus (S.), V. 16. 4.

Hvammr, Þórsárdalr (W.), Th. 8. 2.

Hvamms-daler, see Hvanndaler.

Hvamms-fiaorðr, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), Gen. A. 36.

Hvann-daler, NW. of Óláfsfiaorðr (N.), III. 12. 7.

Hvann-eyrr, Andakíl, Borgarfiaorðr (W.), I. 8. 2: II. 7. 2: III. 5. 2:
Cr. 1. 4.

Hvann-aó, runs from the W. into Iaokulsaó (E.), IV. 3. 4.

Hvarf, = Cape Wrath, Scotland, p. 613.

Hvarf, = Cape Farewell, Greenland, I. 1: II. 12. 3.

Hvarfs-gnípa, the extremity of Cape Farewell, Greenland, II. 12. 3.

Hvassa-hraun, between Rosmhvalanes and Alftanes (S.), V. 16. 9-10, 12.

Hvata-staðer, Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 5.

Hviner, Agðer, Norway, III. 13. 2; 15. 2-3: Mant. 5.

Hvinis-fiaorðr, Agðer, III. 13. 2.

Hvin-verja-dalr, in the centre of Iceland, III. 15. 4.

Hvíta-nes, Landeyjar (S.), Nj. p. 367.

Hvít-ár-backe, S. of Hvítaó (S.), II. 1. 1.

Hvít-ár-síða, N. of Hvitaó (W.), I. 7. 10: II. 2. 1.

Hvít-aó, between Biskupstungor and Hrunamannahreppr (S.), V. 14. 6.

Hvít-aó, Borgarfiaorðr (dividing the West and South Quarters),
I. 10. 1; 11. 1: II. 1. 1; 2. 1; 3. 1, 3: Cr. 5 n.

Hvítra-manna-land, or Írland et Mykla, S. of Wineland, America,
II. 19. 2.

Hæll, on Laxaó, Árness þing (S.), V. 13. 2.




I


Iaðarr, Rogaland, Norway, II. 12, 1: III. 12. 7; 14, 19.

Íafiaorðr, Norway, II. 11. 7.

Iamna-skarð, W. of Norðraó, Mýrar, (W.), II. 3. 12.

Iamta-land, a district of Sweden, V. 15. 1: Th. 1. 1; 2. 1.

Iarð-fallz-gil, on the N. side of Dýrafiaorðr (W.), II. 23. 2.

Iarðlangs-staðer, E. of Langaó, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 7.

Iárn-meis-haofðe, S. of Borgarfiaorðr (S.), Cr. 5. 6.

Ierusalem, Cr, 10. 9 (cf. Hierosalem, Iorsala-heimr).

Ílo-veller, Þrándheimr, Norway, Thorl. 15. 1.

Ingiallz-gnúpr, Hrunamannahreppr (S.), V. 13. 6.

Ingiallz-hváll, on the N. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 3.

Ingiallz-sandr, on the S. side of Onundarfiaorðr (W.), II. 23. 3;
24. 1.

Ingimundar-holt, Víðedalr (N.), III. 5. 2.

Ingolfs-fell, west of Olfusaó (S.), I. 3. 7: IV. 14. 3: V. 16. 4:
Lib. 1. 2.

Ingolfs-fiaorðr, Hornstrander (W.), II. 28. 4-5.

Ingolfs-haofða-hverfe, the district at Ingolfs-haofðe (E.), IV. 15. 3.

Ingolfs-haofðe, Skaftafellzþing (E.), I. 3. 7: IV. 9, 3: Lib. 1. 2.

Iaokul-firðer, on the N. side of Ísafiaorðr (W.), II, 27. 1.

Iaokuls-dalr, W. from Lagarfliót (E.), IV. 3. 7.

Iaokuls-fell, NW. of Skaftafell (E.), IV. 15. 2.

Iaokuls-aó, Breiðársandr (E.), IV. 14. 10.

Iaokuls-aó, Iaokulsdalr (E.), IV. 3. 6-7.

Iaokuls-aó, Lón (E.), IV. 13. 1, 3.

Iaokuls-aó (= Heraðsvaotn), Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 8. 8.

Iaokuls-aó (= Skeiðaraó), runs S. from Iaokulsfell (E.), IV. 15. 3.

Iaokuls-aó, Sólheimasandr (S.), IV. 9. 3-4; 19. 1: V. 2. 2.

Ioldo-hlaup, Ireland, I. 1.

Ioldo-steinn, Langanes (S.), V. 3. 4; 6. 1: Gen. A. 8.

Iólgeirs-staðer, between Rauðaloekr and Þiórsaó (S.), V. 9. 9.

Iorsala-borg, = Jerusalem, Hv. 2. 16.

Iorsala-heimr, = Jerusalem, Cr. 9. 1.

Iorsalir, = Jerusalem, Lib. 10. 12 : Cr. 10. 9: Hv. 2. 16; 3. 11:
Io. 13. 5.

Iaorundar-fell, E. of Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 4.

Iaorundar-holt ( = Garðar), Akranes (S.), I. 7. 3.

Iaorve, Haukadalr (W.), II. 12. 1.

Iosur-heið, an island in Sunnmoerr, Norway, V. 2. 1.

Iótland, = Jutland, Denmark, Cr. 3. 1.

Írland, Ireland, I. 1; 3. 4; 7. 2-3: II. 14. 1; 19. 3; 20. 3; 22. 2:
III. 13. 2: IV. 17. 5: V. 16. 2: Gen. B. 15: Cr. 3. 3: Hv. 2. 20; epil.

Írland et mikla, see Hvítramanna-land.

Ír-aó, under Eyjafiaoll (S.), I. 7. 4: V. 3. 3.

Ísafiarðar-diúp, the outer part of Ísafiaorðr (W.), II. 24. 5.

Ísa-fiaorðr, in the NW. of Iceland (W.), II. 18. 2; 24. 5.

Ísland, Iceland, Prol. I, 1, and passim.

Íslannz-haf, the sea between Iceland and Norway, IV. 15. 1.

Ísleifs-staðer, (?) Hvítársíða (W.), II. 3. 3.

Ísroeðar-staðer, (?) Hvítársíða (W.), II. 3. 3.




K


Kalda-kinn, near Daogorðarnes, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 16. 2.

Kalda-kinn, on the SW. side of Skialfande (N.), III. 16. 1; 17. 3.

Kalda-klofs-aó, Sólheimasandr (S.), V. 2. 3; 3. 1.

Kalda-kvísl, E. from Upper Þiórsaó (S.), V. 13. 6; 14. 6.

Kald-ár-óss, the mouth of Kaldaó (W.), II. 5. 3.

Kald-nesinga-hreppr, Flóe (S.), V. 11. 4.

Kald-aó, N. of Hvitaó (W.), II. 4. 14; 5. 5.

Kalfa-grafer, near Kirkjoboer, Síða (E.), IV. 7. 2.

Kalfa-loekr, S. of Hitaraó, Mýrar (W.), Cr. 5. 3.

Kalf-borgar-aó, on the E. side of Bárðardalr (N.), III. 17. 1; 20. 3.

Kalf-aó, runs into Þiórsaó (S.), V. 12. 5; 13. 2-3.

Kalf-skinn, Árskógstraond, Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 11.

Kalfs-staðer, Hialtadalr (N.), p. 609.

Kall-bakr, -baksvík, Hornstrander (W.), II. 29. 1.

Kalls-brecka, Þverárhlíð (W.), II. 3. 1.

Kalmans-aó, N. of Hvalfiaorðr (S.), I. 7. 2, 8: II. 1. 1.

Kalmans-tunga, between upper Hvítaó and Norðlinga-fliót (S.), II. 1. 1:
Gen. B. 14.

Kamb, Svarfaðardalr (N.), p. 320. 5.

Kamba-kista (?), V. 11. 5.

Kambr, Breiðavík, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 2.

Kambs-nes, Hvammsfiaorðr (W.), II. 4. 15; 14. 7; 15, 10. (Cam-nes):
V. 6. 2.

Kampa-holt, Flóe (S.), V. 12. 1.

Kams-dalr (now Geithella-dalr), S. Alftafiaorðr (E.), IV. 12. 3.

Karla-fiaorðr (?), V. 13. 5.

Karla-staðer, (?) Borgarfiaorðr, II. 1. 2.

Karla-staðer, Langadalr (N.), III. 6. 2.

Karls-dalr, Norðrárdalr, above Hreðovatn (W.), II. 3. 12.

Karls-fell, Karlsdalr (W.), II. 3. 12.

Karls-aó., on the W. side of Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 5.

Kárns-ár-land, W. of Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 10.

Kárs-staðer, Alftafiaorðr (W.), II. 11. 3.

Kata-nes, Caithness, Scotland, I. 6. 5: II. 14. 1-2.

Kata-nes, N. of Hvalfiaorðr (S.), I. 7. 2.

Kata-nes, W. of Eyjafiaoll (S.), V. 3. 4.

Kaupangr, Níðaróss, Norway, Pol. 3. 1-2.

Kefla-vík, W. of Rauðasandr, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 21. 4.

Keldo-dalr, S. of. Dýrafiaorðr (W.), II. 22. 6.

Keldo-gnúpr, E. of Geirlandzaó, Síða (E.), IV. 16. 3.

Keldo-hverfe, -nes, S. of OExarfiaorðr (N.), III. 20. 2, 4-5.

Keldor, N. of Eastern Rangaó (S.), Gen. A. 10: Od. 6. 6.

Kerlingar-fiaorðr, near Hiaorleifs-haofðe (E.), IV. 18. 5.

Kerlingar-aó, W. of Hiaorleifs-haofðe (E.), IV. 18. 8.

Kers-eyrr, W. of Hrútafiaorðr (W,), II. 30. 3.

Ketils-eyrr, S. of Dýrafiaorðr (W.), II. 23. 1.

Ketils-fiaorðr, Eystrebygð, Greenland, II. 12. 9.

Ketils-staðer, Haorðadalr (W.), II. 15. 2; 16. 1.

Ketils-staðer, E. of Lagarfliót near Vallanes (E.), IV. 5. 4.

Kialar-nes, on the SW. side of Esja (S.), I. 3. 10; 5. 1; 6. 3:
II. 14. 6: Lib. 3. 1: p. 327. 14: Cr. 3. 5.

Kialka-fiaorðr (Cialka-), Barðastraond (W.), II. 20. 9.

Kiallaks-hóll (Ceallacs-), above Kiallaks-staðer (W.), II. 16. 2.

Kiallaks-staðer (Ceallacs-), E. of Daogorðarnes, Breiðafiaorðr (W.),
II. 16. 1: Th. 9. 2.

Kiarans-vík (Cearans-), W. of Horn (W.), II. 17. 6.

Kiarra-dalr, above Ornolfsdalr, Mýrar (W.), II. 2. 5.

Kiarr-aó, Kiarradalr (W.), II. 2. 5.

Kiartans-giaó, Eilífsfell (N.); Thorv. 6.

Kiðja-berg, in the S. of Grímsnes (S.), I. 10. 3: II. 26. 3: V. 15. 2.

Kiðja-fell, S. of Hvalfiaorðr (S.), I. 6. 5.

Kiðja-leit, near Iaokulsfell (E.), IV. 15. 2.

Kiaolr, in the centre of Iceland, III. 7. 7-8; 8. 9; 15. 4.

Kiaolr, between Norway and Sweden, Th. 1. 2 (Kiaolo); 2. 1.

Kiolvarar-staðer, Reykjadalr, I. 10. 4: II. 26. 3.

Kiós, S. of Hvalfiaorðr (S.), I. 6. 5.

Kirkjo-bólstaðr, Akranes (S.), I. 7. 4.

Kirkjo-boer, on Hróarsloekr, Rangár-veller (S.), V. 7. 8: Gen. A. 15.

Kirkjo-boer, Síða (E.), II. 21. 1. (S): IV. 16. 1, 5: Gen. A. 23:
Cr. 4. 3: Thorl. 5. 1; 6. 1-2.

Kirkjo-fell, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 5.

Kirkjo-fiaorðr, Eyrarsveit, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 8; 8. 1.

Kirkjo-sandr, Holmr, Akranes (S.), I. 7. 6.

Kleifar, Gilsfiaorðr (W.), II. 18. 4.

Kleifar, N. of Biarnarfiaorðr, Hornstrander (W.), II. 29. 1: Gen. B. 5.

Kleifar-laond, Breiðdalr, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 11. 1.

Klif, between Kiarraó and Þveraó (W.), II. 2. 5.

Klofa-steinar, N. of Búðardalr, Skarðz­straond (W.), II. 17. 3; 18. 1.

Klofe, Land, Outer Rangárveller (S.), Od. 6. 4.

Klofningar, NE. of Daogorðarnes, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 16. 1; 17. 6.

Knafa-hólar, NE. of Reyðarvatn (S.), V. 7. 7.

Knappa-dalr (now Hnappa-dalr), E. from Haffiarðaraó (W.), II. 4. 15;
5. 2: Io. 14. 1.

Knapp-staðer, S. of Fliót, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 12. 1.

Knarrar-nes, off Mýrar (W.), I. 8. 1.

Knarrar-sund, E. of Stokkseyrr, Flóe (S.), V. 12. 2.

Knefils-dals-aó, runs from the S. into Iaokulsaó (E.), IV. 3. 6.

Kolbeins-ár-óss, on the E. side of Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 8. 9; 9. 3.

Kolbeins-dalr, runs from the E. into Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 9. 4.

Kolbeins-ey, N. from Iceland, I. 1.

Kolbeins-staðer, between Kaldaó and Haffiarðaraó (W.), II. 5. 5.

Kolbeins-vík, Hornstrander (W.), II. 29. 1: Gen. B. 5.

Kol-grafa-fiaorðr, E. of Eyrarsveit, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 1.

Kol-grafer, on Kolgrafafiaorðr, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 2.

Kolko-mýrar, SE. of Húnafiaorðr (N.), III. 5. 17.

Kolla-fiarðar-heiðr, N. of Kollafiaorðr (W.), II. 18. 2.

Kolla-fiaorðr, W. of Skálanes, Barðastraond (W.), II. 20. 6-7; 26. 4.

Kolla-fiaorðr, Húnaflóe (W.), II. 29. 4.

Kolla-vík (Kollz-vík), W. of Þistilfiaorðr near Viðarvík (N.),
III. 22. 5.

Kollsveins-staðer, in the N. of Blaondohlíð, Skagafiaorðr, III. 8. 10.

Kollz-hamarr, beside Kalmanstunga, Borgarfiaorðr (W.), II. 1. 2.

Kollz-loekr, Halsasveit (S.), I. 10. 7.

Kollz-sona-fell, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 2.

Kollz-vík, SW. of Patreksfiaorðr (W.), I. 6. 2: II. 21. 4.

Kols-giá (Cols geá), near Þingvaollr (S.), Lib. 3. 2.

Kópa-nes, between Tálknafiaorðr and Arnarfiaorðr (W.), II. 21. 5.

Kora-nes, W. of Alftanes, Mýrar (W.), II. 20. 5.

Korna-haugr, near Saxahváll, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 1.

Krauna-heiðr, near Grenjaðarstaðer, Laxárdalr (N.), III. 19. 5.

Krist-nes, S. of the head of Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 3: Lib.,
p. 305. 21.

Krókr, Norðrárdalr (W.), II. 3. 8, 10.

Króks-fiarðar-múle, -nes, on the E. side of Króksfiaorðr (W.),
II. 18. 4-5.

Króks-fiaorðr, E. of Reykjanes, Gils-fiaorðr (W.), II. 18. 1, 4:
III. 21. 3.

Kroppr, W. of Eyjafiarðaraó, N. of Hrafnagil (N.), III. 14. 15; 19. 1.

Krossa-holt, on Hitaraó, Mýrar (W.), Cr. 5. 1.

Kross-áss, OExarfiaorðr (N.), III. 22. 1.

Krossa-vík, N. of Reyðarfiaorðr (E.), IV. 10. 5: Cr. 8. 7.

Krossa-vík, Vápnafiaorðr (E.), IV. 3. 2: Gen. B. 15: Mant. 4. 1:
(en iðre) IV. 2. 1.

Kross-hólar, E. from Hvammr (W.), II. 14. 8.

Kross-aó, runs from the E. into Markarfliót (S.), V. 3. 6; 6. 1.

Krums-hólar, between Gufaó and Langaó, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 6.

Krysu-vík, on the S. side of Reykjanes, W. of Selvágr (S.), V. 16. 7,
10.

Kræklinga-hlíð, between Horgaó and Gleraó, W. of Eyjafiaorðr (N.),
III. 14. 20; 15. 3.

Kúða-fliót, in S. of Iceland, W. of Meðallaond (E.), IV. 17. 2; 18. 3.

Kúða-fliótz-óss, the mouth of Kúðafliót (E.), IV. 17. 5.

Kvern-vága-straond, Firðafylke, Norway, II. 7. 7.

Kvia-beckr, at the head of Óláfsfiaorðr (N.), III. 12. 6.

Kviar-mið, Ísafiarðardiúp (W.), II. 24. 5.

Kvíganda-fiaorðr, W. of Kollafiaorðr (W.), II. 20. 7-8.

Kvíganda-nes, between Kvigandafiaorðr and Kollafiaorðr (W,), II. 20. 7.

Kvígo-vága-biaorg ( = Vágastape), E. of Rosmhvalanes (S.), V. 16. 10.

Kvígo-vágar ( = Vágar), E. of Rosmhvalanes (S.), V. 16. 3.

Kví-aó, Breiðársandr (E.), IV. 14. 3, 10; 15. 2, 3.

Kylans-holmr, (?) Geitland (W.), II. 1. 2.

Kænu-garðr, = Kovno, Russia, Cr. 9. 1.




L


Lagar-fliót, Fliótzdalr (E.), IV. 3. 7; 4. 3; 7. 1.

Lagar-fliótz-strander, the shores of Lagarfliót (E.), IV. 4. 1.

Lág-ey, near Hiaorleifs-haofðe (E.), IV. 18. 4.

Lamba-fellz-aó, under Eyjafiaoll (S.), V. 3. 1-3.

Lamba-staðer, E. of Alftanes, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 12; 20. 5: Gen. B. 13.

Lamba-staðer, (?) Fliótzhlíð (S.), V. 5. 2 (S).

Landa-mót, near Liósavatn (N.), III. 17. 4.

Land-brot, on Iaokulsaó, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 8. 8.

Land-draugs-holt, N. of Hitaraó (W.), Cr. 5. 2.

Land-eyjar, a district in the SW. of Iceland (S.), Gen. A. 8.

Langa-dalr, Blanda, Húnafiaorðr (N.), III. 6. 1, 4.

Langa-dalr (outer and inner), Skógarstraond, SE. of Breiðafiaorðr
(W.), II. 6. 4; 11. 7; 12. 2; 13. 1: Th. 7; 9.

Langa-dals-aó, Skógarstraond (W.), II. 11. 1.

Langa-dals-aó, E. of Ísafiaorðr (W.), II. 26. 2, 5.

Langa-holt, on the S. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 9.

Langa-holt, E. of Sæmundarhlíð (N.), III. 7. 3.

Langa-nes, in the middle of Arnarfiaorðr (W.), II. 22. 2, 5.

Langa-nes, the extreme NE. promontory of Iceland (E.), I. 1: IV. 1. 1.

Langanes, E. of Markarfliót (S.), IV. 1 n.: V. 3. 4.

Langa-vatz-dalr, N. of Langavatn (W.), II. 4. 3; 30. 1.

Lang-aó, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 7-8, 11.

Lauga-boer, or Laugar, Sælingsdalr (W.), Gen. B. 3.

Laugar-áss, E. of Skálholt (S.), Hv. 4. 8.

Laugar-brecka, on the S. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 6. 1-2:
Gen. B. 13.

Laugar-dalr, N. of Grímsnes (S.), I. 9. 4: V. 14. 3: Lib. 7. 3:
Cr. 8. 10: Hv. 1. 8.

Laugar-dalr, between Skaotofiaorðr and Mióvefiaorðr (W.), II. 26. 1.

Lax-ár-dalr, Hvammsfiaorðr (W.), II. 15. 8; 20. 7: Gen. A. 35; B. 13.

Lax-ár-dalr, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 6. 6.

Lax-ár-dalr, Laxaó, Skialfande (N.), III. 19. 5.

Lax-aó, Kiós (S.), I. 6. 7.

Lax-aó, runs into Leirárvágr (S.), I. 7. 7-8, 11.

Lax-aó, Miklaholts-hreppr, N. of Faxa-óss (W.), II. 5. 2 n., 6.

Lax-aó, Skógarstraond (W.), II. 11. 8; 13. 1.

Lax-aó, runs from the S. into Skialfande (N.), III. 18. 2-3.

Lax-aó, between Þiórsaó and Hvítaó (S.), V. 12. 5; 13. 5.

Leiðolfs-fell, in the NW. corner of Síða (E.), IV. 18. 1.

Leiðolfs-staðer, Flóe (S.), V. 11. 2.

Leiðolfs-staðer, under Leiðolfsfell (E.), IV. 18. 1.

Leik-skálar, Haukadalr (W.), II. 12. 1.

Leir-haofn, NE. of OExarfiaorðr (N.), III. 22. 2.

Leir-aó, runs into Leirárvágr between Borgarf. and Hvalf. (S.),
I. 7. 12.

Leiro-backe, Land, Outer Rangárveller (S.), Od. 6. 3.

Leiro-loekr, W. of Langaó, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 11-12.

Leiro-vágr, beneath Heiðr, S. of Kialarnes (S.), I. 4. 3: IV. 13. 1;
14. 3: V. 16. 3.

Leiro-vágr, Alftafiaorðr, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 11. 8: Cr. 4. 2.

Leiro-vágs-aó, S. of Kialarnes (S.), I. 4. 3-4.

Líðandes-nes, the SW. promontory of Norway, III. 15, 1: V. 8. 2.

Lín-akra-dalr, SE. of Miðfiaorðr, Húnaflóe (N.), III. 2. 1.

Lincoln, England, Þorl. 4. 2.

Liósa-vatn, W. of Skialfandafliót (N.), III. 16. 1; 17. 2: V, 7. 9:
Gen. A. 31: Lib. 5. 5.

Liósa-vatz-skarð, E. of Hnióskadalr (N.), III. 16. 1; 17. 4; 18. 1.

Liótar-staðer, SW. of Síða, near Ásar, (E.), V. 7. 3.

Liótolfs-staðer, 'in from Kalda-kinn' (W.), II. 16. 2.

Liótolfs-staðer, Fellzskógar (W.), II. 16. 2.

Loðmundar-fiaorðr, N. of Seyðisfiaorðr, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 9. 1.

Loðmundar-hvammr, = Sólheimar (S.), IV. 9. 3.

Lofót, off Hálogaland, Norway, V. 12. 3.

Laogberg, the rock of Laws at the Alþing (S.), Lib. 4. 2; 5. 2; 7. 5;
p. 329. 4: LC. 18; 28; 29; 32-4: LS. 6; 8: MM. pp. 350-3; 355; 358-9;
Nj. p. 367: Cr. 2. 4; 6. 1; 8. 3-4: Ód. 3. 3.

Loekja-mót, Víðedalr (N.), Mant, 6. 2: Cr. 2. 1.

Loekjar-botnar, between Outer Rangaó and Þiórsaó (S.), V. 9. 3.

Loekjar-bugr, S. of Hitar[aó,] Mýrar (W.), Cr. 5. 2.

Lóma-gnúps-land, Fliótzhverfe (E.), IV. 18. 1.

Lóma-gnúps-sandr, in the S. of Iceland, W. of Ingolfs-haofðe (E.),
Od. 1. 1.

Lón, between the two Horns, Austfirðer (E.), I. 4. 3: IV. 13. 1, 3:
Lib. 2. 3.

Lón (= Skipalón), near the mouth of Horg[aó,] Eyjafiaorðr (N.),
III. 14. 20.

Lóns-land, on the SW. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 6. 1.

Lóns-heiðr, SW. of Alftafiaorðr, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 13. 1:
Cr. 4. 2 n.

Lunans-holt, Landsveit (S.), V. 9. 6.

Lundar (?), IV. 15. 5.

Lundar-brecka, on the E. side of Bárðardalr (N.), III. 17. 1.

Lundr, Hnióskadalr (N.), III. 16. 1.

Lundr, S. Reykjadalr (S.), I. 11. 2: II. 3. 8.

Lundr, Skáney, Sweden, Hv. 2. 9: Pol. 3. 3.

Lýsa, on the S. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 9, 11.




M


Magadaborg, Magdeburg, Germany, Hv. 2. 4: Io. 6. 1.

Mána-fell, on the E. side of Skialfanda­fliót (N.), III. 20. 3.

Mána-fors, -gerðe, Kolgomýrar (N.), Thorv. 7.

Mána-aó, Tiornes (N.), III. 20. 3.

Mána-vík, Skagastraond (N.), III. 6. 5.

Mána-þúfa, Skagastraond (N.), III. 6. 5-6.

Manna-fallz-brecka, on the S. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 6. 2.

Mar-boele, Kræklingarhlíð, Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 21.

Markar-fliót, N. and W. of Eyjafiaoll (S.), V, 3. 4; 4. 2; 5. 1:
Gen. A. 2; 8; 9.

Márs-staðer, Hrunamannahreppr (S.), V. 13. 4.

Márs-staðer, Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 4.

Máva-hlíð, on the N. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 2, 6; 11. 5:
Th. 8.

Meðal-fars-sund, between Fyn and Jutland, Denmark, II. 5. 8.

Meðal-fell, Hornafiaorðr (E.), IV. 14. 5.

Meðal-fell, Kiós (S.), I. 6. 6.

Meðal-fellz-straond, the great promontory in Breiðafiaorðr (W.),
II. 17. 3: Gen. B. 13: Th. 9: Mant. app.

Meðal-laond, S. of Síða (E.), IV. 16. 4.

Mela-hverfe, S. of Borgarfiaorðr (S.), I. 7. 11.

Melar, on the S. side of Borgarfiaorðr (S.), pp. 640-2.

Melar, Hellisdalr (W.), II. 3. 8.

Melar, at the head of Hrútafiaorðr (W.), II. 30. 3.

Melracka-dalr, S. of Hvítaó, near Hrauns-áss (S.), II. 2. 1.

Melracka-nes, N. of Southern Alftafiaorðr (E.), IV. 12. 3: Cr. 4. 1.

Merki-gil, near Eyjafiarðaraó (N.), III. 14. 10; 15. 6.

Merki-gil, N. of Goðdaler (N.), III. 8. 5-6.

Merkr-hraun, on the borders of Skeið and Flóe (S.), V. 12. 4.

Merævi, = Moray, Scotland, II. 14. 1.

Mið-boer, (?) Rangárveller (S.), Gen. A. 11.

Mið-enge, Grímsnes (S.), II. 21. 1: V. 15. 1.

Mið-fell, N. of Hvalfiaorðr (S.), I. 7. 8.

Mið-fiaorðr, E. of Hrútafiaorðr (N.), III. 2. 1, 3: p. 329. 6:
Nj. p. 368.

Mið-hús, Gnúpverjahreppr (S.), V. 13. 3.

Mið-iaokull, Greenland, II. 12. 3.

Mígande, on Upsastraond, W. of Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 7.

Mikils-staðer, Langadalr (N.), III. 6. 2.

Mikla-boer, E. of Skagafiaorðr (N.), pp. 414-15.

Mikla-garðr, = Constantinople, I. 1: Gen. B. 5: Lib. 10. 12: Cr. 9. 1.

Mikla-garðr, Keldohverfe (N.), III. 20. 2.

Minþaks-eyrr, W. of Ingolfs-haofðe, in the S. of Iceland, I. 3. 7:
Lib. 1. 2.

Miola, an island off Hálogaland, Norway, III. 14. 20.

Miors, a lake in Heiðmaork, Norway, III. 8. 9.

Mió-synde, (?) Svínadalr (W.), V. 7. 9.

Mióva-dalr, near Norðrárdalr (W.), II. 3. 10.

Mióva-dals-aó, Fliót, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 12. 3-4.

Mióva-fiaorðr, Ísafiaorðr (W.), II. 26. 1-2.

Mióva-fiaorðr, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 10. 2.

Mó-berg, Langadalr, Húnafiaorðr (N.), III. 6. 2, 4; 12. 2.

Mó-bergs-breckor, Langadalr (N.), III. 6. 1.

Moðolfs-gnúpr, N. of Skaftár-óss (E.), IV. 15. 6.

Maoðro-fell, W. of Eyjafiarðaraó (N.), III. 15. 6.

Maoðro-veller, W. of Eyjafiarðaraó, (N.), Gen. A. 26; 32; B. 15:
Mant. 1. 6: Cr. 6. 4; 10. 8: p. 601.

Maoðro-veller, Kiós (S.), I. 6. 6.

Mó-eiðar-hváll, between Þveraó and Eastern Rangaó (S.), V. 4. 7 n.;
7. 9.

Mó-gils-loekr, Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 4.

Mó-gils-aó, Kialarnes (S.), I. 4. 4; 5. 1; 6. 4.

Molda-tún, Norðmoerr, Norway, IV. 17. 1.

Mór, Fliót, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 11. 5.

Maork, N. of Kirkjoboer, Síða (E.), IV. 19. 2.

Maork, Skeið (S.), V. 12. 4.

Moerr, a district in Norway, divided into Norð- and Sunn-Moerr,
III. 15. 12: IV. 14. 1: V. 2. 1: Gen. A. 19; B. 10: Lib. 2. 1.

Mosfell (lower), Mosfellssveit, S. of Kiós (S.), I. 7. 8: II. 4. 1;
7. 2 (?): V. 16. 3: Gen. A. 4 (?): Mant. 5. 5: Lib. 8. 3.

Mosfell (upper), Grímsnes (S.), I. 4. 3: III. 8. 1: V. 14. 3:
Gen. A. 13; 14: Mant. 5. 1; Lib. 2. 1; 7. 1; Epil.: Hv. 1. 1.

Mostr, an island off Horðaland, Norway, II. 10: 1: Th. 2. 3: Cr. 3. 4.

Múla-fell, Saurboer (W.), Od. 4. 3.

Múle, Southern Alftafiaorðr, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 12. 2-3.

Múle, Mosfellssveit (S.), I. 4. 4.

Múle, Saurboer (W.), II. 30. 2.

Múle, near Stacksaó, Biskupstungor (S.), V. 13. 6.

Munoðar-nes, between Norðraó and Gliúfraó (W.), II. 4. 4.

Mý-dalr, the SW. corner of the E. Quarter, IV. 18. 1.

Mý-dals-aó, Kialarnes (S.), I. 5. 1; 6. 5.

Mýrar, a district NW. of Borgarfiaorðr (W.), I. 7. 6; 8. 1: Gen. B. 13.

Mýrar, N. of Dýrafiaorðr (W.), II. 23. 2.

Mýrar, W. of Hornafiaorðr (E.), IV. 14. 9.

Myrk-aó, Horgárdalr (N.), III. 14. 14-15.

Mýrr, app. on Bardastraond (W.), II. 26. 4.

Mýrr, N. of Þveraó (S.), V. 4. 2.

Mý-vatn, E. of Skialfandafliót (N.), III. 17. 2; 21. 1-3: Cr. 4. 3.

Mæle-fell, NW. of Goðdaler, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 7. 8; 8. 3.

Mæle-fellz-aó, and -dalr, running NE. under Mælefell (N.), III. 7. 5-8.

Mæle-fellz-gil, Biarnardalr (W.), II. 3. 11.

Mærin, Þrándheimr, Norway, IV. 11. 1.




N


Narfa-sker, Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 10.

Náttfara-vík, on the SW. side of Skialfande (N.), I. 2. 2: III. 19. 2.

Naumdoela-fylke, = Naumodalr, V. 4. 1 n.

Naumo-dalr, between Þrándheimr and Hálogaland, Norway, II. 4. 1:
III. 9. 4; 14. 5: V. 4. 1; 14. 1: Gen. B. 7.

Nauta-bú, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 9. 3.

Nes, N. of Norðrfiaorðr (E.), IV. 10. 3.

Nes (pl.), the SW. nesses of Iceland, II. 20. 3-4: IV. 14. 3.

Nes, = Þórsnes, Th. 10-11.

Nes-hraun, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 1.

Niarð-ey, Hálogaland, Norway, II. 17. 1.

Niarð-vík, S. of Héraðsflóe (E.), IV. 4. 1; 8. 1: Gen. A. 19; 27.

Níðar-holmr, now Munkholm, Þrándheimr, Norway, Cr. 6. 4 B.

Níðar-óss, Þrándheimr, Norway, Cr. 5. 2 n.; 6. 4 B: Hv. 1. 12:
Pol. 3. 1.

Norð-fiaorðr, S. of Mióvafiaorðr (E.), IV. 10. 3.

Norðlendinga-fiórðungr, the Northern Quarter of Iceland (N.), III. 1;
5. 16; 22. 6: V. 17. 4: Lib. 5. 3: pp. 329. 5; 339. 8; Nj. p. 368:
Cr. 1. 3; 2. 2; 4. 3 B; 8. 7; 10. 6: Hv. 2. 9-10 : Pol. 12. 1:
Io. 6. 3; 7. 1; 11. 2; App.

Norðmandi, = Normandy, IV. 14. 1.

Norð-moerr, Norway, IV. 17. 1.

Norðr-ár-dalr, Mýrar (W.), II. 3. 10; 4. 5.

Norðr-ár-dalr, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 8. 7.

Norðr-laond, the Scandinavian countries, I. 2. 3.

Norðr-aó, Mýrar (W.), II. 3. 9; 4. 1.

Norðr-aó, runs from the E. into Iaokulsaó, Skagafiaorðr (N.),
III. 8. 1, 6.

Norðr-tunga, between Kiarraó and Þveraó (W.), II. 2. 5 (M).

Noregr, Norway, I. 1; 2. 2-3; 4. 1, 5: II. 14. 1: III. 2. 1; 5. 1, 9;
8. 1; 13. 2: IV. 12. 1; 13. 2; 16. 4: V. 8. 1; 9. 2; 10. 3; 11. 2;
12. 2; 13. 1; 16. 5: Gen. A. 33; B. 5; 13: Th. 1; 2. 2: Mant. 3. 1;
4. 1; 5. 2: Lib., prol. 2; 1. 1, 4; 7. 1, 7, 9; 8. 4; 9. 1, 8; 10. 12:
pp. 315. 10; 329. 8: Cr. 2. 7; 3. 4-5; 8. 8; 10. 2-3: Hv. 1. 7, 10-12;
2. 2, 14, 17; 3. 11; 4. 3-4, 11; 5. 3, 12-13: Þorl. 1. 1; 7. 5; 8. 1:
Pol. 3. 1, 6; 7. 3; 13. 2-3; 15. 2: Io. 1. 2; 2. 2; 4. 1; 7. 7; 14. 3:
Od. 1. 1; 2. 5; 3. 4.

Ný-kome, a branch of Skaftaó (E.), IV. 16. 1.





O


Oddbiarnar-leiðe, Rangárveller (S.), V. 4. 3.

Odde, between the two Rangár (S.), V. 7. 5; 8. 7: Gen. B. 15: Hv. 2. 7:
Þorl. 3: Pol. 1-2: Io. 5. 1: Od. 2. 1-2; 6. 1-2.

Odde enn lítle, between the two Rangár (S.). V. 7. 5.

Oddgeirs-hólar, E. of Olfusaó, Flóe (S.), I. 7. 12: V. 11. 5.

Oddz-áss, Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 12.

Ódeila, between Hnjóskadalr and Flateyjardalr (N.), III. 16. 1.

Ófeigs-fiaorðr, Hornstrander (W.), II. 28. 4.

Ofro-staðer, Iaðarr, Norway, Gen. B. 5 (Opro-); 7: Mant. 5. 1.

Ó-færa, see U-færa.

Ogurs-vík, between Skaotofiaorðr and Mióvafiaorðr (W.), II. 26. 1.

Óláfs-dalr, Gilsfiaorðr (W.), II. 18. 3-4.

Óláfs-fiaorðr, Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 12. 6, 8.

Ólafs-veller, Skeið (S.), V. 12. 3.

Óláfs-vík, on the N. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 4; 18. 3.

Oldo-gróf, N. of Þveraó (S.), V. 7. 4.

Óleifs-borg (S.), IV. 16. 2.

Olfus, the district S. of Olfusvatn (S.), Cr. 8. 5: Hv. 1. 1.

Olfus-aó, from Olfusvatn to the sea (S.), I. 3. 8: V. 11. 2: Lib. 1. 2.

Olfus-vatn (S.), I. 3. 8: II. 7. 2: Lib. 7. 4: Cr. 8. 3.

Olvés-haugr, Flóe (S.), V. 12. 2.

Olvés-staðer, Flóe (S.), V. 11. 2 (S).

Omð, Hálogaland, Norway, III. 14. 17; 20. 3.

Ondorð-eyrr, Eyrarsveit, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 1: Th. 7. 2.

Ondorðo-nes, in the S. of Grímsnes (S.), V. 15. 1.

Ondort-nes, the NW. point of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 1.

Ongull, Hálogaland, Norway, III. 16. 5.

Onundar-fiaorðr, S. of Ísafiaorðr (W.), II. 24. 4.

Onundar-holt, Flóe (S.), V. 11. 6.

Opro-staðer, see Ofro-staðer.

Orkneyjar, the Orkneys, I. 1: II. 14. 2; 19. 2: III. 22. 1: IV. 14. 2 :
V. 13. 5: Th. 1. 2: Pol. 1. 4; 13. 1; 15. 2.

OErlygs-haofn, Patreksfiaorðr (W.), I. 6. 2.

OErlygs-staðer, Alftafiaorðr (W.), II. 11. 6: Th. 8. 2.

Orms-dalr, runs W. from Breiðabólstaðr in Vestrhóp (N.), III. 4. 2.

Orms-aó, Breiðdalr (E.), IV. 11. 4.

Orms-aó, runs into Lagarfliót from the W. (E.), IV. 3. 8; 4. 1.

Orms-staðir, Vestmanna-eyjar (S.), V. 3. 7.

Ornolfs-dalr, N. of Kiarraó, Mýrar (W.), II. 2. 5; 3. 3 (-dalsaó):
Lib. 5. 1.

Ornolfs-staðer, Kiarradalr (W.), II. 2. 5.

Orrecs-heiðr, N. of Norðrárdalr, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 8. 7.

Orrosto-dalr, Flóe (S.), V. 7. 2; 12. 2.

Ósar, Austfirðer (E.), I. 7. 3.

Ós-fiaoll, SE. of Héraðsflóe (E.), IV. 3. 4.

Óslandz-hlíð, E. of Skagafiaorðr (N.), p. 414.

Osló, Christiania, Norway, Pol. 13. 2.

Ósóme, v. r. for Gersoeme, II. 24. 2.

Óss, Breiðdalr (E.), IV. 11. 5.

Óss, at the head of Miðfiaorðr (N.), III. 3. 1.

Óss, Tiornes (N.), III. 20. 1.

Osta, Norway, II. 15. 11: III. 1. 1.

Otra-dalr, S. of Arnarfiaorðr (W.), Gen. A. 37.

Oxa-loekr (al. Oxna-), SE. of Vallanes (E.), IV. 4. 3.

OExar-ár-brú, Þingvaollr (S.), Cr. 6. 1.

OExar-ár-holmr, at the mouth of OExaraó (S.), V. 12. 4.

OExar-fiaorðr, between Tiornes and Melrakka-slétta (N.), II. 28. 5:
III. 22. 1: Cr. 4. 3.

OExar-aó, Bárðardalr, SE. of Liósavatn (N.), III. 17. 4.

OExar-aó, runs into Olfusvatn at Þingveller (S.), I. 3. 8: V. 14. 2;
16. 3.

Oxl, on the S. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 9.

OExna-dalr, runs from the S. into Horgár­dalr (N.), III. 14. 17.

Oxna-loekr, see Oxa-loekr.

OExn-ey, Hvammsfiaorðr (W.), II. 12. 1.




P


Palltescia, = Polotsk, Russia, Cr. 9. 1.

Papey, off Hamarsfiaorðr (E.), Prol. p. 13.

Pappýle, (?) Síða, Prol. p. 13: IV. 14. 8.

Paris, Þorl. 4. 2.

Patrecsfiaorðr, Vestfirðer (W.), I. 6. 2: II. 21. 4-5.

Pettlandz-fiaorðr, Pentland Firth, I. 2. 1.




R


Rafta-loekr, old name of Almannafliót (E.), IV. 15. 6.

Rana-staðer, (?) Skaptártunga (E.), IV. 18. 3.

Rangaðar-varða, near the upper sources of the Blanda (N.), III. 7. 8.

Rangár-hverfe, = Rangárveller (S.), Lib. 3. 4.

Rang-ár-óss, the mouth of outer Rangaó (S.), V. 4. 1; 8. 4: Hv. 2. 3.

Rangár-veller, between the two Rangár (S.), V. 5. 2; 9. 1 (enir
eystre): Gen. A. 3: Od. 6. 2.

Rang-ár-veller (Outer), between Outer Rangaó and Þiórsaó (S.), V. 9. 3.

Rang-aó, on the W. side of Lagarfliót (E.), IV. 3. 7-8.

Rang-aó (Eastern), runs from the NE. into Þveraó (S.), V. 4. 2; 7. 3,
7, 9: Gen. A. 1: Cr. 8. 2 (?): Od. 6. 2.

Rang-aó (Western or Outer) (S.), V. 7. 6; 8. 7; 9. 1, 5, 8, 11:
Cr. 5. 2.

Rangæinga-fiórðungr, the Southern Quarter of Iceland, Lib. 10. 6.

Rauða-biarnar-staðer, E. of Gufaó, near Eskiholt (W.), II. 4. 5.

Rauða-fell (Eastern), under Eyjafiaoll (S.), V. 3. 1 n.

Rauða-gnúpr, the NW. promontory of Melracka-slétta (N.), III. 22. 2.

Rauða-loekr, Hvitársíða (W.), II. 3. 3.

Rauða-loekr, between Þiórsaó and Outer Rangaó (S.), V. 9. 8.

Rauða-loekr, Oræfe (E.), IV. 15. 4: Od. 1. 2.

Rauða-melr (Outer), West of Haffiarðaraó (W.), II. 5. 2, 7
(-mels-laond); 15. 14.

Rauða-sandr, NW. of Barðastraond (W.), II. 21. 3.

Rauða-skriða, -skriðo-laond, E. of Skial­fandafliót (N.), III. 20. 3,
5.

Rauða-skriðor, Hamarsfiaorðr (E.), IV. 11. 7.

Rauðkollz-staðer, between Laxaó and Straumfiarðaraó (W.), II. 5. 7.

Rauð-aó, Flóe (S.), V. 10. 6; 11. 2.

Rauðs-gil, (?) Northern Reykjadalr (S.), I. 10. 5.

Raufar-fell, under Eyjafiaoll (S.), V. 3. 1.

Raufar-nes, Mýrar (W.), I. 7. 6.

Rauma-ríke, Norway, on the borders of Sweden, Th. 1. 1.

Raums-dalr, between Norðmoerr and Sunnmoerr, Norway, III. 5. 1:
V. 3. 4.

Raums-doela-fylke, the district of Raums­dalr, V. 3. 4 n.

Refs-staðer, SW. of Vápnafiaorðr (E.), IV. 2. 2.

Reistar-gnúpr, OExarfiaorðr (N.), III. 22. 1-2.

Reistar-aó, Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 9.

Reyðar-fell, Hvítársíða, I. 9. 1.

Reyðar-fiall, S. of Reyðafiaorðr (E.), I. 2. 2 (S).

Reyðar-fiaorðr, Austfirðer (E.), I. 2. 2: IV. 5. 3; 10. 5: Cr. 8. 7.

Reyðar-múle, between Olfusvatn and Laugardalr (S.), V. 14. 2.

Reyðar-vatn, N. of Eastern Rangaó (S.), V. 4. 2; 7. 5, 7: Gen. A. 12.

Reyðar-vatz-múle, near Reyðarvatn (S.), Gen. A. 12 n.

Reyker (Upper), SW. of Reykjaholt, Borgarfiaorðr (S.), I. 9. 6.

Reyker, at the head of Miðfiaorðr (N.), III. 2. 3.

Reyker, Skeið (S.), Gen. A. 17.

Reykja(r)-dalr (Northern), S. of Hvítaó (S.), I. 6. 6; 10. 4 (M);
11. 3.

Reykja(r)-dalr (Southern), I. 9. 1: Cr. 8. 10.

Reykja(r)-dalr, S. of Skialfande (N.), III. 18. 3; 19. 1-2: Cr. 1. 3.

Reykja-dals-aó, Northern Reykjadalr (S.), I. 9. 5; 10. 1.

Reykja-hlíð, NE. of Mývatn (N.), III. 21. 1.

Reykja-hólar, Reykjanes, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 17. 4: V. 4. 6:
Cr. 4. 4.

Reykja-holt, N. Reykjadalr (S.), I. 11. 2: II. 17. 6; 26. 3: Cr. 10. 8:
Hv. 3. 3; 4. 1, 10: Þorl. 11. 6: Od. 4. 3.

Reykja-laug, Laugardalr (S.), Cr. 8. 10.

Reykja-laug, Southern Reykjadalr (S.), Cr. 8. 10.

Reykja-nes, between Berofiaorðr and Þorskafiaorðr (W.), II. 19. 1;
21. 6: V. 4. 6 (M): Gen. B. 11; 12; 14; 15.

Reykja-nes, the SW. corner of Iceland (S.), I. 1; 2. 3; 7. 6; 8. 1:
II. 12. 7: V. 1. 1; 16. 11: Th. 4. 2.

Reykja-aó, runs from the SE. into Oláfsfiarðaraó (N.), III. 12. 8.

Reykjar-dalr, see Reykja-dalr.

Reykjar-fiaorðr, in Arnarfiaorðr (W.), II. 22. 5.

Reykjar-fiaorðr (Northern), Horn­strander (W.), Od. 5. 1.

Reykjar-hóll, Fliót, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 11. 5.

Reykjar-straond, Skagafiaorðr (N.), Thorv. 1.

Reykjar-vík, Seltiarnarnes (S.), I. 3. 8: Lib. 1. 1.

Reykja-veller, near the upper sources of the Blanda (N.), III. 7. 8.

Reyner, Akranes (S.), I. 7. 2.

Reyner, Mýrdalr (E.), IV. 18. 8.

Reynis-nes, NE. of Eyjafiaoðr (N.), III. 14. 2.

Reyr-vaollr, Norway, II. 9. 3.

Roðreks-gil, S. of Mælifellzdalr (N.), III. 7. 7.

Róeskelda, = Roskilde, Denmark, Pol. 3. 5.

Rogaland, Norway, I. 2. 3: II. 17. 2-3; 22. 1: III. 18. 1.

Róm(a), Rome, I. 1: Cr. 10. 10: Hv. 1. 11; 2. 2; 5. 3: Pol. 7. 1:
Io. 6. 1.

Róma-borg, Rome, Hv. 2. 18: Io. 7. 5.

Rond, Hringaríke, Norway, Mant. 5. 2.

Ros, Ross, Scotland, II. 14. 1.

Rosm-hvala-nes, the NW. part of Reykjanes (S.), II. 20. 3: V. 16. 3, 9.

Rúða, = Rouen, Normandy, IV. 14. 1: Hv. 1. 11.

Ruzia, = Russia, Cr. 9. 1.

Rykin-vík, Rond, Norway, Mant. 5. 2.

Ryta-gnúpr, S. of Aðalvík (W.), II. 17. 6.




S


Salt-eyrar-óss, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 6.

Sand-ár-tunga, Þiórsárdalr (S.), Hv. 4. 7.

Sand-brecka, between Kaldaó and Hitaó (W.), II. 5. 5.

Sand-dalr, runs into Upper Norðrárdalr above Hvammr (W.), II. 3. 10.

Sand-ey, perh. North Uist, Hebrides, p. 615.

Sand-eyrar-aó, N. of Ísafiarðardiúp (W.), II. 26. 5-6.

Sand-fell, S. of Svínafell, Oræfe (E.), IV. 15. 3-4.

Sand-gil, near Reyðarvatn (S.), V. 7. 7-8: Gen. A. 12.

Sand-hóla-ferja, near the mouth of Þiórsaó (S.), V. 5. 2; 7. 2:
Gen. A. 5.

Sand-loekr, E. of Skeið (S.), V. 12. 3, 5.

Sand-nes, Hálogaland, Norway, I. 8. 1: V. 4. 1.

Sand-aó, a tributary of Norðraó (W.), II. 3. 9.

Sand-vík, N. of Gerper, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 10. 4.

Sand-vík, Kialarnes (S.), I. 6. 3.

Sand-vík, E. of Viðfiaorðr (E.), IV. 1. 3.

Sarps-borg, E. of the Vík, Norway, Hv. 4. 3.

Sauða-fellz-laond, SE. of Hvammsfiaorðr (W.), II. 15. 7: Gen. B. 13.

Sauða-nes, SE. of Þistilsfiaorðr (E.), III. 22. 6.

Sauð-aó, SW. of Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 7. 2.

Saur-boer, S. of Gilsfiaorðr, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 18. 1-2; 30. 2:
Gen. B. 10.

Saur-boer, on Eyjafiarðaraó (N.), III. 15. 8: Gen. A. 31.

Saur-boer, N. of Hvalfiaorðr (S.), I. 7. 7, 11: Od. 3. 2; 4. 3.

Saxa-hváll, at the NW. of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 1.

Sax-land, Saxony, Mant. 3. 2: Cr. I. 1; 2. 7; 10. 1: Hv. 1. 3; 2. 1,
4: Io. 1. 2; 3. 3; 6. 1.

Scála-holt (Skálholt), the bishop's See, on Hvítaó (S.), Lib. 9. 1;
10. 4; Epil.: LC. 15: Cr. 5. 5 n.; 10. 1, 5: Hv. prol.; 1-5:
Þorl. 4. 1; 7. 4-5; 8. 4; 9. 6; 10. 3; 12. 1-2 ; 15. 1: Pol. 2. 3;
4-5; 7. 1; 10. 1; 13. 3; 14. 1-2: Io. 1. 2; 6. 1-2; 12. 5; 13-14;
App.: Od. prol.: p. 957.

Scála-holtz-land (S.), Lib. 10. 4: Io. 6. 2.

Scora-dalr, S. of Hvítaó, Borgarfiaorðr (W.), I. 8. 4: II. 11. 7;
20. 3.

Scor-ey, SW. of Alftanes, Mýrar (W.), II. 20. 5.

Sel, near Biarnarhaofn (W.), II. 9. 2.

Sela-eyrr, on the S. side of Borgarfiaorðr (S.), I. 8. 3.

Sela-lón, N. of Mýrar (W.), I. 8. 1.

Sel-ár-dalr, NW. of Steingrímsfiaorðr (W.), II. 17. 6.

Sel-ár-dalr, N. of Vápnafiaorðr (E.), IV. 2. 3.

Sela-sund, between Purkey and Hrappsey, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 9. 3.

Sel-fors, Kaldnesingahreppr (S.), V. 11. 4.

Selja, S. of Stað, Norway, Hv. 1. 11.

Selja-landz-múle, SW. of Eyjafiaoll (S.), V. 3. 4: Gen. A. 8.

Selja-landz-aó, under Eyjafiaoll (S.), V. 3. 2.

Sels-loekr, Hrunamannahreppr (S.), V. 13. 5.

Sel-tiarnar-nes, N. of Skerjafiaorðr (S.), V. 16. 12.

Sel-vágar, Northern Alftafiaorðr (E.), Cr. 4. 1.

Sel-vágr, S. of Reykjanes (S.), V. 16. 7.

Seyðar- or Seyðis-fiaorðr, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 5. 4; 10. 1: Cr. 8. 7.

Seyðis-fiaorðr, Ísafiarðardiúp (W.), II. 24. 8.

Síða, a district in the S. of Iceland (E.), II. 5. 11: III. 21. 1:
IV. 14. 4: Gen. A. 25; B. 10; 15: Lib. 2. 1; 7. 1; Epil.: Cr. 8. 7;
10. 7: Hv. 4. 1: Þorl. 5. 1: Io. 1. 1.

Síða, = Hvítársíða (W.), II. 2. 3: III. 11. 2.

Siglo-fiaorðr, W. of Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 12. 7.

Siglo-fiaorðr, Eystrebygð, Greenland, II. 12. 9.

Siglo-nes, E. of Siglofiaorðr (N.), III. 12. 7; 14. 2.

Siglo-vík, on the E. side of Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 15. 12.

Sigmundar-haugr, at Laugarbrecka, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 6. 3.

Sigmundar-nes, between Gliúfraó and Norðraó (W.), II. 4. 4.

Sigmundar-staðer, E. of Signýjarstaðer, near Reykjaholt (S.), I. 10. 6.

Signýjar-bruðr, Hálogaland, Norway, III. 16. 5.

Signýjar-staðer, S. of Hvitaó, N. of Reykjaholt (S.), I. 6. 6; 10. 1.

Silfra-staða-hlíð, between Norðraó and Iaokulsaó, Skagafiaorðr (N.),
III. 8. 7.

Sióland, = Sjælland, Denmark, I. 2. 1: III. 2. 2.

Sireks-staðer, SW. of Vápnafiaorðr (E.), IV. 3. 1.

Skafta-fellz-þing, Oræfe (E), IV. 18. 2, 6.

Skafta-holt, Gnúpverjahreppr(S.), V. 13. 2.

Skaft-aó, NW. of Síða (E.), IV. 17. 5; 18. 1, 3.

Skaga-fiaorðr, W. of Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 5. 12; 8. 2; 11. 1:
Gen. A. 32; B. 13: Lib. 5. 3: Cr. 10. 10.

Skaga-straond, E. of Húnaflóe (N.), III. 6. 5: Gen. B. 13.

Skage, W. of Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 5. 9.

Skála-brecka, W. of Olfusvatn (S.), V. 14. 2.

Skála-fell, W. of Hornafiaorðr (E.), IV. 14. 7.

Skála-fell, near Olfusvatn (S.), I. 3. 8.

Skála-mýrr, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 8. 3.

Skála-nes, W. of Gufufiaorðr (W.), II. 20. 6.

Skála-vík, S. of Ísafiaorðr (W.), II. 24. 3, 7.

Skáld-skelmis-dalr, Geitland (W.), II. 1. 1.

Skále, Berofiaorðr (E.), IV. 11. 6.

Skálholt, see Scála-holt.

Skalla-nes, on the N. side of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 1.

Skalmar-kelda, near Rauðamelr (W.), II. 5. 4.

Skalmar-nes, Barðastraond, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 5. 2: Gen. B. 5.

Skáney, Northern Reykjardalr (S.), I. 6. 6; 10. 2.

Skáney, = Skaane, in the S. of Sweden, Hv. 2. 9.

Skarð (Eastern), Rangárveller (S.), V. 8. 4: Cr. 8. 3.

Skarð (Western or Outer), Land, between Þiórsaó and Rangaó (S.),
Pol. 1. 5; 2. 4; 10. 1: Od. 6. 4.

Skarð, Meðallaond (E.), IV. 16. 4.

Skarð, Skarðsstraond, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 17. 6.

Skarð (= Svignaskarð), W. of Gliúfraó, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 5.

Skarðz-brecka, Hornafiaorðr (E.), IV. 14. 3.

Skarfa-nes, between Þiórsaó and Outer Rangaó (S.), III. 11. 2 (?):
V. 6. 2.

Skeggja-staðer, Mosfellssveit, E. of Reykjavík (S.), I. 4. 3.

Skeggja-staðer, on Sandvík (E.), IV. 1. 3.

Skeggja-staðer, E. of Iaokulsaó (E.), IV. 3. 3.

Skeið, between Hvítaó and Þiórsaó, NE. of Flóe (S), V. 12. 3:
Gen. A. 17.

Skeiðs-breckor, above Vatzhorn, Hauka­dalr (W.), II. 12. 1.

Skelja-brecka, S. of Borgarfiaorðr (W.), I. 8. 3.

Skialda-biarnar-vík, Hornstrander (W.), II. 28. 1.

Skiald-ey, off Daogorðarnes, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 9. 3.

Skialfanda-fliót, the river which runs into Skialfande (N.), Cr. 4. 3.

Skialfanda-fliótz-óss, the mouth of prec. (N.), III. 16. 1; 17. 1.

Skialfande, E. of Eyjafiaorðr (N.), I. 2. 2: Mant. 4.

Skiálgs-dals-aó, runs from the W. into Eyjafiarðaraó (N.), III. 14. 10;
15. 6-7.

Skíða-dalr, runs from the S. into Svarfaðardalr (N.), III. 12. 7.

Skinna-staðer, S. of OExarfiaorðr (N.), Cr. 4. 3.

Skioldolfs-nes, Breiðadalr (E.), IV. 11. 5.

Skioldolfs-staðer, W. of Iaokulsaó (E.), IV. 3. 6.

Skipa-hylr, Hitaraó, Mýrar (W.), Cr. 5. 1.

Skóga-hverfe, Síða (E.), IV. 7. 2: Gen. A. 23: Cr. 4. 3.

Skógar (Eastern), under Eyjafiaoll (S.), I. 7. 8: IV. 9. 4: V. 2. 2:
Cr. 1. 2.

Skógar, Þorskafiaorðr (W.), II. 17. 5.

Skógar-nes, Miklaholtshreppr, Mýrar (W.), Gen. B. 10.

Skógar-straond, S. of Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 11. 8.

Skaól, between Skaftaó and Drífande, Síða (E.), IV. 18. 1.

Skora-dalr, see Scora-dalr.

Skora-vik, Fellzstraond (W.), II. 16. 1.

Skaorðo-vík (al. Skarða), E. of Laxaó, Skialfande (N.), III. 18. 2.

Skorra-holt, (?) in  Skorradalr (S.), II. 20. 3.

Skoto-fiaorðr, Ísatiaorðr (W.), II. 25. 2; 26. 1.

Skottland, = Scotland, II. 9. 3; 14. 1-4; 20. 1.

Skratta-fell, Reykjadalr (N.), III. 18. 3.

Skraumo-hlaups-aó, runs from the S. into Hvammsfiaorðr (W.), II. 13. 1;
14. 8; 15. 1: Th. 6.

Skríðins-enne, E. of Kollafiaorðr, Húnaflóe (W.), II. 29. 4; 30. 4.

Skriðo-dalr, E. of Lagarfliót (E.), IV. 5. 2-3; 6. 2.

Skrúðr (al. Skrúðey), SE. of Reyðarfiaorðr (E.), IV. 10. 6.

Skúfs-loekr, Flóe (S.), V. 10. 1.

Skugga-biaorg, Náttfaravík (N.), I. 2. 1: III. 16. 1.

Skúla-staðer, Alftanes (S.), V. 16. 12.

Skutils-fiaorðr, Ísafiaorðr (W.), II. 24. 6-7.

Skutr (?), II. 20. 2.

Sleggjo-beins-aó, Breiðavík, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 12.

Sleggjo-loekr, S. of Kiarraó, opposite Ornolfsdalr (W.), II. 2. 4;
3. 3.

Sleito-biarnar-staðer, Saurboer, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 18. 2.

Slétta, W. of Iaokulfirðer (W.), II. 27. 1.

Slétta, = Melrakka-slétta (N.), III. 22. 1. 3.

Slétta-hlíð, NE. of Haorðastraond, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 11. 4;
12. 7.

Slétta-nes, between Dýrafiaorðr and Arnarfiaorðr (W.), II. 22. 6.

Sletto-biarnar-staðer, S. of Deilðaraó, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 9. 2.

Smiðs-staðer, Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 13.

Smior-sund, between Horðaland and Rogaland, Norway, I. 2. 3.

Sniallz-haofðe (al. Snjall-steins-h.), on Outer Rangaó (S.), V. 7. 2.

Snorra-staðir, near Scálaholt (S.), Pol. 7. 1.

Snæ-fell, Greenland, II. 12. 3.

Snæ-fellz-iaokull, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 12. 3.

Snæ-fellz-nes, S. of Breiðafiaorðr (W.), I. 1; 2. 3: II. 20. 5:
III. 22. 6: Th. 4.

Snæ-fiaoll, N. of Ísafiarðardiúp (W.), II. 26. 6: III. 1. 2.

Snæ-land, = Iceland, I. 2. 2.

Soeckolfs-dalr, SE. of Hvammsfiaorðr (W.), II. 15. 6.

Sogn, in the W. of Norway, I. 4. 1: II. 25. 1; 26. 6: III. 6. 1;
12. 8; 20. 2: IV. 15. 1: V. 7. 5; 11. 1; 12. 1: Gen. A. 13; 14; 25;
35: Th. 1: Mant. 5.

Sókna-dalr, Haðaland, Norway, III. 15. 2: Gen. A. 33.

Sólar-fiall, Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 2.

Sóle, SE. of Hafrsfiaorðr, Norway, Gen. B. 15; 16.

Sól-heimar, E. of Iaokulsaó (S.), IV. 9. 3-4: Gen. B. 13 (?).

Sól-heima-sandr, E. of Iaokulsaó (S.), IV. 1 n.; 9. 3; 19. 1.

Solmundar-haofðe, Mýrar (W.), II. 1. 1.

Sólundir, off the mouth of Sognefjord, Norway, I. 8. 1.

Solva-dalr, E. of Eyjafiarðaraó (N.), III. 14. 2.

Solva-dalr, Eystrebygð, Greenland, II. 12. 9.

Solva-hamarr, on Breiðavík, S. of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 12.

Solve, E. of Agðanes, Norway, V. 9. 7.

Sóta-fell, W. of Vestrhóp (N.), III. 3. 2.

Sóta-nes, Ránríke, Norway, II. 4. 3.

Spá-kono-fell, Skagastraond (N.), Gen. B. 13.

Stað, Cape Stadt, Norway, I. 1: Th. 2.

Stacks-aó, runs into Tungofliót (S.), V. 13. 6; 14. 3.

Staðar-backe ('Stead-bank'), Miðfiaorðr (N.), p. 610.

Staðar-hóll, Saurboer, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 18. 2.

Stafa-fell, Lón (E.), Cr. 4. 3 n.

Stafa-holt, between Norðraó and Þveraó, Borgarfiaorðr (W.), II. 3. 7;
7. 1: Od. 4. 1.

Stafa-holtz-tunga, ibid., II. 3. 7.

Stafa-nes-vágr, Fialer, Norway, V. II. 2.

Stafangr, = Stavanger, Norway, I. 7. 8, 11: Þorl. 8. 2.

Stafn-gríms-staðer, old name of Sigmun­dar-staðer (S.), I. 10. 6.

Stafaó, Sléttahlíð, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 11. 4.

Staf-aó, = Stafsaó (W.), Th. 4. 3; 6. 1.

Stafs-hóll, Deilðardalr, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 11. 5; 12. 2.

Stafs-aó, between Þórsnes and Hraunsfiaorðr, Snæfellznes (W.),
II. 9. 2; 10. 2. (See also Staf-aó.)

Stál-fiara, Flóe (S.), V. 11. 2.

Stangar-holt, E. of Langaó, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 7.

Stape, Arnarfiaorðr (W.), II. 22. 2, 6.

Staurr, = the Staer of Assynt, Sutherland, Scotland, p. 613.

Steig, Ongull, Hálogaland, Norway, III. 16. 5.

Steinar, between Þveraó and Hvítaó, Borgarfiaorðr (W.), II. 3. 9.

Steinfinnz-staðer, above Krossaó, E. of Markarfliót (S.), V. 3. 6.

Steingríms-fiaorðr, Húnaflóe (W.), II. 5. 1; 17. 6; 20. 7; 29. 3:
III. 10. 2: Gen. B. 11.

Steinolfs-dalr, Króksfiaorðr (W.), II. 18. 1, 5.

Steinolfs-hialle, in Fagradalr (W.), II. 18. 1.

Steinroeðar-staðer, Hrafnkelsdalr (E.), IV. 6. 3.

Steinroeðar-staðer, near Olfusvatn (S.), V. 16. 2.

Steins-holt, Gnúpverjahreppr (S.), V. 13. 2.

Steins-holt, Mýrar (W.), Cr. 5. 2.

Steins-loekr, between Rauðaloekr and Þiórsaó (S.), V. 9. 9-10.

Steins-staðer, Tunga, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 8. 3.

Steins-staðer, Vatzdalr (N.), Hu. 1. 11.

Steins-vað, on Grímsaó, Borgarfiaorðr (S.), Od. 4. 3.

Stífla, S. of Fliót, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 12. 1, 3.

Stíganda-hróf, beside Þingeyrar, Húna­vatn (N.), III. 5. 9.

Stigi (= Stigagnúpr), NE. of Skálavík, Vestfirðer (W.), II. 24. 3.

Stim, between Raumsdalr and Norðmoerr, Norway, III. 15. 2.

Stiorno-steinar, Flóe (S.), V. 11. 2.

Stocka-hlaðer, W. of Eyjafiarðaraó (N.), III. 16. 1.

Stocks-eyrr, E. of Olfusaó, Flóe (S.), V. 11. 2.

Staoðvar-fiaorðr, Austfirðer, (E.), IV. 11. 1.

Staong, Þiórsárdalr (S.), V. 13. 3.

Stórolfs-vaollr, between Þveraó and Eastern Rangaó (S.), V. 4 n.; 7. 4.

Stota-loekr, runs into Eastern Rangaó, SW. of Reyðarvatn (S.), V. 7. 7:
Gen. A. 12.

Strandar-heiðr, between Barðastraond and Rauðasandr (W.), II. 26. 4.

Strander, = Hornstrander (W.), II. 17. 6; 28. 4: Od. 5. 1.

Strander (2), Rangárveller (S.), V. 8. 7.

Straum-fiarðar-aó, Miklaholt, W. of Mýrar (W.), II. 5. 6, 8.

Straum(s)-fiaorðr, W. of Alftanes, Mýrar (W.), II. 4. 12: III. 6. 4:
Gen. B. 13.

Straum-nes, Hornstrander (W.), II. 17. 6; 27. 2; 28. 1.

Streite, Breiðdalr, Austfirðer (E.), IV. 11. 5.

Strind, Þrándheimr, Norway, IV. 2. 1.

Straond (= Látrastraond), E. of Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 16. 3.

Straond (= Upsastraond), W. of Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 7.

Strúgs-staðer, Langadalr (N.), III. 6. 2.

Sturlo-staðer, under Tungofell (W.), II. 1. 1.

Suðr-ey, off Skógarstraond, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 12. 1.

Suðr-eyjar, the Hebrides, I. 2. 1; 4. 5; 5. 1; 6. 1: II. 5. 9; 9. 1;
14. 1: III. 13. 2-3; 15. 1; 17. 3: IV. 4. 2; 13. 3; 14. 1; 16. 1:
V. 15. 1: Th. 1. 2-3; 5. 1; 6. 1.

Suðr-iaoklar, S. from Hvítaó (S.), I. 11. 1.

Suðr-land, Sutherland, Scotland, II. 14. 1.

Suðr-laond, the lands S. of the Baltic, Cr. 1. 1.

Súganda-fiaorðr, Ísafiaorðr (W.), II. 24. 3, 6.

Súlo-holt, Flóe (S.), V. 10. 1.

Sumarliða-boer, Fliótzhlíð (S.), V. 4. 6.

Sunn-horða-land, Norway, Th. 2. 3.

Sunnlendinga-fiórðungr, the Southern Quarter of Iceland (S.), V. 1;
17. 2: Cr. 4. 3; 10. 6: Hv. 2. 10.

Sunn-moerr, between Firðer and Raums­dalr, Norway, II. 23. 1:
IV. 16. 3.

Sunno-dalr, SW. of Vápnafiaorðr (E.), IV. 2. 2.

Súrna-dalr, Norðmoerr, Norway, III. 15. 2.

Surtz-hellir, see Hellirenn Surtz.

Svaða-staðer, S. of Skagafiaorðr (N.), p. 413.

Svalbarð, on the E. side of Eyjafiaorðr (N.). III. 15. 12: Cr. 2. 4.

Svalbarðe, Hafsbotn, I. 1.

Svans-hóll, Biarnarfiaorðr (W.), II. 29. 2.

Svarfaðar-dalr, runs from the SW. into Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 2:
IV. 1. 4: p. 320. 7.

Svart-ár-dalr, on the E. side of the Blanda (N.), III. 7. 4.

Svart-ár-dalr, Héraðsvaotn, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 7. 7.

Svartz-sker, off Mýrar (W.), II. 20. 5.

Svefn-eyjar, E. of Flatey, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 20. 1.

Sveinungs-eyrr, Barðastraond (W.), II. 26. 4.

Sveinungs-vík, SE. of Melracka-slétta (N.), III. 22. 3, 5.

Svertings-staðer, W. of Markarfliót (S.), V. 6. 1.

Svez-staðer, Hringaríke, Norway, Mant. 5. 2.

Svía-ríke, = Sweden, I. 1; 2. 1: III. 9. 1; 16. 1.

Sviðin-horna-dalr, = Hamarsdalr, above Hamarsfiaorðr (E.), IV. 11. 7.

Svína-dalr, S. of Saurboer, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 17. 4; 18. 1.

Svína-dalr, SE. of Húnafiaorðr (N.), III. 5. 15.

Svína-fell, Oræfe (E.), Gen. A. 25; B. 15: Nj. pp. 364, 367: Od. 1. 2.

Svína-nes, W. from Skálanes, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 17. 6.

Svína-vatn, Grímsnes (S.), V. 15. 1.

Svína-vatn, near Hraunsfiaorðr, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 8. 3.

Svína-vatn, Svínadalr (N.), III. 5. 11, 15.

Svín-ey, off Daogorðarnes, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 12. 2; 16. 1.

Svín-hage, on Outer Rangaó (S.), V. 7. 6.

Svíþióð, = Sweden, III. 9. 1 n.

Svolðr, an island off Vindland, beside Rugen, Cr. 8. 12.

Syðre-dalr, = Reykjardalr enn Syðre (S.), I. 11. 2.

Sygna-fylke, = Sogn, Norway, V. II. 2: Mant. 5. 2.

Sygna-kleif, N. of Fliót, W. of Horn (W.), II. 25. 1.

Syllingar, = the Scilly Isles, Cr. 3. 3.

Sýr-loekjar-óss ('Sour-beck mouth') Skaptafellsþing (E.), p. 417.

Sælings-dalr, -dals-aó, -dals-tunga, N. of Hvammsfiaorðr (W.),
Gen. A. 36; B. 3.

Sæmundar-hlíð, S. of Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 7. 1: Gen. A. 32.

Sæmundar-loekr, W. of Sæmundarhlíð (N.), III. 7. 1.

Sætr, Haorðaland, Norway, II. 24. 3.




T


Talcna-fiaorðr, N. of Patreksfiaorðr (W.), II. 21. 5.

Teigar-aó, runs from the W. into Iaokulsaó, S. of Hofsteigr (E.),
IV. 3. 5.

Thile, = Thule or Iceland, Prol., p. 13.

Tialda-nes, N. of Arnarfiaorðr (W.), II. 22. 1.

Tialda-nes, Saurboer, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), Gen. B. 9.

Tialda-staðer, Rangárveller (S.), V. 8. 5.

Tialda-vaollr, W. of Haofðabrecka (E.), IV. 17. 2.

Tinno-dals-aó, runs from the N. into Breiðdalsaó (E.), IV. 11. 4.

Tinz-dalr, Þelamaork, Norway, V. 8. 1.

Tior-nes, NE. of Skialfande (N.), III. 20. 1, 3.

Taoðor, Sudrey, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 12. 1.

Tofta-fell, Breiðársandr (E.), IV. 15. 2.

Tofta-vaollr, near Sunnudalr, SW. of Vápnafiaorðr (E.), IV. 3. 1.

Torfa-staðer, Vestradalr, Vápnafiaorðr (E.), IV. 2. 3.

Torf-hvala-staðer, Langavatzdalr (W.), II. 4. 3.

Torf-nes, Saurboer, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 18. 1.

Torgar, = Torghatten, Hálogaland, Norway, V. 4. 1.

Traðar-holt, Flóe (S.), V. 11. 2; 12. 2.

Trekt, (?) Utrecht, Hv. 5. 1.

Tré-kyllis-vík, Hornstrander (W.), II. 28. 5.

Trostans-fiaorðr, Arnarfiaorðr (W.), II. 22. 5.

Trolla-hals, between Kolgrafafiaorðr and Staðr, Snæfellznes (W.),
II. 8. 2.

Trolla-skógr, near Reyðarvatn (S.), V. 7. 7: Gen. A. 12.

Trolla-tunga, Steingrímsfiaorðr (W.), II. 29. 3: Gen. B. 11.

Tunga en eystre, between Tungofliót and Hvítaó (S.), V. 14. 6.

Tunga en vestre, between Tungofliót and Bruaraó (S.), V. 13. 6.

Tunga (= Broeðratunga), Biskupstungor (S.), V. 14. 6.

Tunga, between Hvítaó and Reykjadalsaó (S.), I. 10. 1.

Tunga, Norðrárdalr (W.), II. 3. 9.

Tunga, between Svartaó and Iaokulsaó, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 8. 3.

Tunga, = Soelingdalstunga (W.), Gen. B. 3; 13.

Tunga (= Þórorms-túnga), Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 13.

Tungan lítla, between Hvítaó and Geitaó (W.), II. 1. 1-2.

Tún-garðr, Flekkudalr, N. of Hvammsfiaorðr (W.), H. 16. 1.

Tungo-fell, Geitlaond (W.), II. 1. 1.

Tungo-fell, Syðredalr (S.), I. 9. 2: II. 4. 3.

Tungo-heiðr, E. of Skialfande (N.), III. 18. 2.

Tungo-laond (= Skaftártunga), between Skaftaó and Holmsaó (E.),
IV. 17. 5.

Tungo-laond (= Hróarstunga), between Lagarfliót and Iaokulsaó,
IV. 3. 7.

Tungo-aó, Stífla, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 12. 1-2.

Tungo-aó, S. of Tiornes (N.), III. 20. 1.




U


Úbygð, Greenland, I. 1.

Úfeigs-staðer, Gnúpverjahreppr (S.), V. 13. 2.

Úfoera, Hornstrander (W.), II. 29. 1: Gen. B. 5.

Ú-foera, S. of Onundarfiaorðr (W.), II. 23. 3.

Ufser, W. of Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 7.

Ulaztir, = Ulster, Ireland, Hv. 2. 20.

Ulfars-aó, Kiós (S.), I. 4. 3.

Ulfars-fell, on the W. side of Alftafiaorðr (W.), II. 11. 2: Th. 7. 8.

Ulfs-daler, NE. of Fliót, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 12. 4-5, 7.

Ulfs-staðer, Northern Reykjardalr (S.), I. 10. 5.

Una-dals-aó, runs from the E. into Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 11. 1.

Unaðs-dalr (al. Una-dalr), Haofðastraond (N.), III. 5. 12.

Unaðs-dalr, N. of Ísafiaorðr (W.), II. 25. 2; 26. 5.

Una-loekr, to the S. of Lagarfliót (E.), IV. 7. 1.

Una-óss, at the E. corner of Héraðsflóe (E.), IV. 7. 1.

Undorn-fell (cod. Undunfell), Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 13.

Upplaond, the Uplands in the E. of Norway, III. 5. 1: V. 2. 1; 12. 1:
Gen. B. 16: Pol. 3. 2.

Uppsaler, = Upsala, Sweden, III. 9. 1: Lib. 7. 9; Epil.: p. 309. 1.

Urðar-vatn, Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 4.

Urðer, Svarfaðardalr (N.), III. 12. 8.

Urt-hvalar-fiaorðr, E. of Ondorðeyrr, Snæfellznes (W.), Th. 7. 2.

Usvifrs-loekr, under Esjoberg (S.), I. 6. 4.




V


Vaðill, Barðastraond (W.), I. 7. 6: II. 24. 1; 26. 4.

Vágar, near Búlandzhaofðe, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 7. 6.

Vágr, to the S. of Rosmhvalanes (S.), II. 12. 7: V. 16. 7, 11.

Valdres, in the centre of Norway, IV. 18. 8.

Valla-nes, E. of Lagarfliót (E.), IV. 4. 3.

Valþiófs-staðer, Haukadalr (W.), II. 12. 1.

Valþiófs-staðr, Fliótsdalr (E.), Gen. A. 26.

Vá-múle, Óláfsfiaorðr (N.), III. 12. 8.

Vánar-skarð, under Túngnafellsjaokull, in the centre of Iceland (N.),
III. 17. 1: IV. 15. 5.

Vápna-fiarðar-aó, runs from the SW. into Vápnafiaorðr (E.), IV. 2. 2.

Vápna-fiarðar-straond, the SE. shore of Vápnafiaorðr (E.), IV. 3. 2.

Vápna-fiaorðr, Austfirðer (E.), II. 3. 7: IV. 2. 1-2; 3. 1: Gen. A. 28:
Hv. 2. 1.

Varð-giaó, on the E. side of Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 15. 11-12.

Varm-aó, Olfus (S.), V. 16. 4-5.

Varma-dalr, on Hróarstoekr, Rangárveller (S.), V. 8. 7.

Varma-loekr, between Geirsaó and Grimsaó, Borgarfiaorðr (S.), I. 9. 4:
Gen. A. 18.

Vatn, Haukadalr (W.), II. 15. 8.

Vatna-hverfe, Eystrebygð, Greenland, II. 12. 9.

Vatnars-haugr, S. of Bergen, Norway, Mant. 5. 3.

Vatn-lausa, SW. from Reykjavík (S.), I. 6. 5; 10. 4.

Vatz-dalr, Húnafiaorðr (N.), III. 5. 3, 12; 11. 3, 5: Mant. 6. 2:
Cr. 1. 1; 2. 1: Hv. 1. 11.

Vatz-dals-aó, Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 12.

Vatz-fell, W. of Fliótshlíð (S.), V. 4. 2.

Vatz-fiaorðr, E. of Barðastraond (W.), I. 2. 3: II. 15. 9b; 21. 1.

Vatz-fiaorðr, between Mióvef. and Ísaf. (W.), II.26. 2: III. 6. 4:
Gen. B. 2: Mant. 1. 7: Cr. 10. 10.

Vatz-hals, S. of Þórsnes (W.), Th. 8. 3.

Vatz-hlíð, Land, Outer Rangárveller (S.), Od. 6. 3.

Vatz-horn, Haukadalr (W.), II. 12. 1.

Vatz-laond, near Olfusvatn (S.), V. 16. 1.

Vatz-nes, Bolungarvík (W.), II. 24. 5.

Vatz-nes, Húnaflóe (N.), III. 3. 1.

Vatz-aó, OExnadalr (N.), III. 14. 17.

Vatz-skarð, SW. of Sæmundarhlíð (N.), III. 5. 15; 6. 3; 7. 4.

Vegger (= Síðumulaveggir), Hvítársíða (W.), II. 3. 3.

Veiðe-lausa, Hornstrander (W.), II. 28. 5.

Vékels-haugar, Kiaolr, Central Iceland, III. 7. 8; 15. 4 (enn syðre).

Véli-gerðe (al. Vélu-, Vælu-), Flóe (S.), V. 7. 1-2; 12. 2.

Vellan-catla, E. of Olfusvatn (S.), Lib. 7. 4: Cr. 8. 3.

Veller, Rangárveller (S.), V. 9. 4(? outer), 5: Od. 6. 2.

Veller ('Wallds'), Svarfaðardalr (N.), pp. 606, 608.

Veller ('Wallds'), = Þingveller (S.), p. 598.

Ver (= Alftaver), E. of Kúðafliót (S.), Þorl. 6. 3-4; 10. 3: Pol. 2. 3.

Vera-dalr, Þrándheimr, Norway, IV. 4. 1: Gen. A. 19.

Verma-land, Sweden, III. 4. 1: Gen. B. 5.

Vestars-nes (?), II. 17. 6.

Vest-dals-aó, falls into Seyðisfiaorðr (E.), IV. 10. 1.

Vestfirðínga-fiórðungr, the Western Quarter of Iceland, II. 1; 30. 5:
V. 17. 4: Th. 10. 4 n.: Cr. 2. 2; 8. 7; 10. 6: Hv. 2. 10: Pol. 14. 1:
Od. 5. 1.

Vest-firðer, the Western Friths of Iceland, Th. 10. 4: Hv. 4. 10.

Vest-fold, in the SE. of Norway, III. 9. 4.

Vestmanna-eyjar, S. of Iceland, I. 3. 7: V. 3. 7: Lib. 7. 1: Cr. 8. 2:
Hv. 4. 7: Pol. 10. 1.

Vestmars-vatn, W. of Múle, Reykjadalr (N.), III. 18. 3; 19. 1.

Vestra-dals-aó, runs from the SW. into Vápnafiaorðr (E.), IV. 2. 1-3.

Vestre-bygð, Greenland, II. 12. 9.

Vestre-dalr, Saurboer, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 18. 2.

Vestr-hóp, S. of Húnafiaorðr (N.), III. 3. 1-2: Mant. 1. 7: Io. 7. 1 n.

Vestr-laond, the western lands (Great Britain and Ireland), V. 7. 3
n.: p. 326. 7.

Vetleifs-holt, between Outer Rangaó and Rauðaloekr (S.), V. 2. 8.

Við-borð, at the head of Hornafiaorðr (E.), IV. 14. 6, 9.

Víðe-dalr, S. of Húnafiaorðr (N.), III. 4. 1; 5. 2: Gen. B. 2; 4; 5:
Cr. 2. 1.

Víðe-loekr, Þverárhlíð, Mýrar (W.), II. 3. 6.

Víðe-mýrr, Skagafiaorðr (N.), II. 4. 5; 20. 8: Io. 12. 2.

Víðe-skógr, Flóe (S.), V. 12. 2.

Við-fiaorðr, W. of Barðznes (E.), IV. 10. 4.

Við-fiaorðr, SE. of Finnafiaorðr (E.), IV. 1. 2.

Við-vík, E. of Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 9. 3.

Vífils-fell, E. of Hafnarfiaorðr (S.), I. 3. 8.

Vífils-staðer (al. -toftir), near Vífilsfell (S.), I. 3. 8.

Vífils-toftir, (?) Fellsskógar (W.), II. 16. 2.

Viggja, Þrándheimr, Norway, V. 3. 3.

Vigra-fiaorðr, E. of Þórsnes, running into Alfta-fiaorðr (W.),
II. 8. 1; 11. 6: Th. 4. 4.

Vík (al. Eyvík), Grímsnes (S.), Cr. 4. 4.

Vík, (?) = Trékyllisvík (W.), II. 28. 5.

Vík or Víken, Norway, III. 13. 2: V. 11. 2: Th. 2. 1: Lib. 9. 1:
Hv. 1. 7: Pol. 3. 2.

Víken gamla, between Hólmkelsaó and Búlandzhaofðe, Snæfellznes (W.),
II. 7. 5.

Víkings-loekr, on Outer Rangaó (S.), V. 7. 5; 8. 4.

Víkr, beside Patrecsfiaorðr (W.), II. 21. 4.

Vikrar-skeið (al. Vikars-), beside Olfusaó (S.), II. 14. 6.

Villinga-dalr, Eyjafiarðardalr (N.), III. 15. 8.

Vind-land, Wendland, the S. side of the Baltic, Cr. 3. 2; 8. 1:
Hv. 1. 11.

Vin-heiðr (? Brunanburh), England, II. 4. 1.

Vín-land et góða, on the East Coast of America, II. 19. 2: III. 11. 2:
Lib. 6. 2: Cr. 8. 1.

Vinverja-dalr, near the source of the Blanda (N.), III. 7. 8; 8. 9:
Io. 7. n.

Vitaz-giafe, beside Þveraó (N.), III. 21. 1.

Vívils-dalr, runs from SE. into Horða­dalr, Breiðafiaorðr (W.),
II. 15. 4.

Vaollr, E. of Eastern Rangaó (S.), V. 4. 7 n.: Gen. A. 3.

Vaorðo-fell, Skeið (S.), V. 12. 3.

Vors, E. of Bergen, Norway, II. 5. 6: III. 14. 4: IV. 9. 2; 10. 5;
12. 1: V. 10. 5; 14. 5: Lib. 7. 1.

Vorsa-boer, Flóe (S.), V. 10. 5.

Vælugerðe, see Véli-gerðe.




Y


Ýrar-fell, NW. of Goðdaler (N.), III. 7. 7.

Yrjar, at the mouth of Trondhjemsfjord, Norway, IV. 3. 1.



Ytra-Skarð, between Þiórsaó and Outer Rangaó (S.), Od. 2. 2; 6. 4.

Yxney, see OExney.




Þ


Þangbranz-hróf, Southern Alftafiaorðr (N.), Cr. 4. 2.

Þangbranz-hróf, S. of Hitaraó, Mýrar (W.), Cr. 5. 1.

Þangbranz-loekr, S. of OExarfiaorðr (N.), Cr. 4. 3 n.

Þangbranz-poll, Mývatn (N.), Cr. 4. 3.

Þegjanda-dalr, S. of Grenjaðarstaðer, Laxárdalr (N.), III. 19. 5.

Þelamaork, Central Norway, I. 3. 1: V. 8. 1.

Þerno-nes, S. of Reyðarfiaorðr (E.), IV. 10. 6.

Þing-eyrar, S. of Húnafiaorðr (N.), III. 5. 9: Io. 12. 5; 13. 1.

Þingeyrar-þing, S. of Dýrafiaorðr (W.), II. 25. 2.

Þingeyra-sveit, S. of Húnafiaorðr (N.), III. 5. 6.

Þing-nes, S. of Hvítaó Borgarfiaorðr (S.), II. 26. 2, 4: Lib. 5. 1.

Þing-vaollr, the site of the Alþing, N. of Olfusvatn (S.), V. 14. 2;
16. 2-3: Mant. 1. 1: Lib. 7. 4 n.: pp. 351, 353, 356: Cr. 8: Hv. 2. 17.

Þistils-fiaorðr, W. of Langanes (NE.), II. 6. 1: III. 22. 6.

Þióðreks-borg, on Kollafiarðar-heiðr (W.), II. 18. 2.

Þiórs-aó, the great river which runs SW. from the centre of Iceland
(S.), V. 4. 2; 5. 2; 6. 2; 7. 2; 9. 3; 10. 10-11; 12. 1, 3, 5: Pol. 10.

Þiórs-ár-dalr, W. of Þiórsaó (S.), III. 22. 3-4: V. 9. 6; 13. 3:
Lib. 7. 1: Cr. 6. 2.

Þiórs-ár-holt, between Outer Rangaó and Þiórsaó (S.), V. 9. 6.

Þiórs-ár-óss, the mouth of Þiórsaó (S.), V. 10. 6.

Þórbeines-staðer, S. of Þórsnes (W.), Th. 8. 3.

Þórbrannz-staðer, Norðrárdalr, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 8. 7.

Þórdísar-holt, Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 2.

Þóres-biaorg, Hnappadalssýsla (W.), II. 5. 4.

Þóres-hólar, Brynjodalr, Kiós (S.), I. 6. 7.

Þóres-staðer, Þorskafiaorðr (W.), II. 17. 5.

Þórfinnz-staðer, Norðrárdalr, Mýrar (W.), II. 3. 8.

Þórgantz-staðer, Hvítársíða (W.), II. 2. 3.

Þórgeirs-fiaorðr, between Eyjafiaorðr and Skialfande (N.),
III. 16. 3-4.

Þórgeirs-haugr, Pappýle, IV. 14. 8.

Þórgerðar-fell, near Grenjaðarstaðer, Laxárdalr (N.), III. 19. 5.

Þórgils-staðer, Diúpafiaorðr (W.), II. 20. 2.

Þórmóðs-eyrr, on the W. side of Siglofiaorðr (N.), III. 12. 7.

Þórmóðs-sker, SW. of Alftanes, Mýrar (W.), II. 20. 5.

Þóroddz-staðer, E. of Hrútafiaorðr (N.), III. 1. 2.

Þórolfs-fell, Fliótzhlíð (S.), V. 3. 5.

Þórorms-tunga, Vatzdalr (N.), III. 5. 10.

Þóro-tofter, Langaholt, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 5. 9.

Þórs-aó, runs into Alftafiaorðr E. of Þórsnes (W.), II. 10. 2; 11. 1:
Th. 4. 3; 7. 1.

Þórs-ár-dalr, Alftafiaorðr (W.), Th. 8. 2.

Þorska-fiarðar-straond, on Þorskafiaorðr (W.), II. 20. 1.

Þorska-fiarðar-þing, at the head of Þorskafiaorðr (W.), II. 18. 3:
III. 10. 2.

Þorska-fiaorðr, N. of Reykjanes, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 17. 4-5;
19. 1.

Þórs-maork, between Markarfliót and Krossaó (S.), V. 3. 6: Od. 6.

Þórs-nes, S. of Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 10. 1-2: Th. 4; 10.

Þórs-ness-þing, on Þórsnes (W.), II. 7. 6; 11. 6; 12. 2: Th. 9:
p. 328. 13.

Þórunnar-ey, at the head of Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 3.

Þórunnar-hálsar, (?) Rangárveller (S.), V. 8. 3.

Þórunnar-holt, (?) Þverárhlíð (W.), II. 3. 6.

Þórunnar-hylr, on Þveraó, Borgarfiaorðr (W.), II. 3. 6.

Þórunnar-tofter, Fellzstraond (W.), II. 16. 2.

Þórvallz-dalr, S. of Hrísey, Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 9, 13.

Þórvallz-dals-aó, ibid., III. 14. 12.

Þórvarðz-staðer, Hvítársíða (W.), I. 10. 2: II. 2. 2: III. 11. 2.

Þrasa-staðer, above Sólheimasandr (S.), V. 2. 2.

Þríhyrningr, W. of Fliótzhlíð (S.), V. 6. 3; 7. 8: Gen. A. 9.

Þróndar-holt, Flókadalr (S.), I. 9. 5.

Þróndar-holt, between Þiórsaó and Laxaó (S.), III. 15. 4: V. 12. 5.

Þrónd-heimr, Norway, I. 7. 7: IV. 2. 1; 11. 1: V. 3. 1: Th. 2. 1:
Cr. 5. 6; 6. 2: Hv. 1. 12; 5. 13: Þorl. 8. 2: Pol. 7. 3: Io. 4. 5.

Þruma, Agðer, Norway, V. 8. 2.

Þræla-vík, near Lóndrangar, Snæfellznes (W.), II. 6. 2.

Þúfa, on Hiallanes (W.), II. 23. 1.

Þúfo-biaorg, at the SW. corner of Snæfellznes (W.), II. 6. 2.

Þulu-nes, Vors, Norway, IV. 9. 2.

Þurs-staðer, SW. of Borg, Borgarfiaorðr (W.), II. 4. 7.

Þvátt-aó, S. of Southern Alftafiaorðr (E.), Lib. 7. 1: Cr. 4. 2 B*:
Od. 1. 3.

Þver-ár-dalr, Mýrar (W.), II. 3. 1.

Þver-ár-hlíð, between Þveraó and Norðraó, Mýrar (W.), II. 2. 1; 3. 1.

Þver-fell, Saurboer, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 18. 2.

Þver-firðer, the Friths on Barðastraond (W.), II. 20. 1.

Þver-aó, runs into Hvítaó, Mýrar (W.), II. 2. 5; 3. 1, 6-7.

Þver-aó, Vatznes, Húnafiaorðr (N.), III. 3. 1.

Þver-aó, Blaondohlíð, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 8. 10-11.

Þver-aó en efre, Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 4: Gen. B. 15:
Thorl. 15. 1.

Þver-aó (en ytre), Eyjafiaorðr (N.), III. 14. 4; 15. 11.

Þver-aó, OExnadalr (N.), III. 14. 19.

Þver-aó, joins Markarfliót and the two Rángár (S.), V. 4. 2; 7. 3.

Þver-aó, Gnúpverjahreppr (S.), V. 13. 2.

Þver-aó, (?) = Túngaó, S. of Olfusvatn (S.), V. 16. 1, 4.

Þyckva-boer, W. of Kuðafliót (E.), IV. 15. 5: Hv. 5. 11: Þorl. 6. 1.

Þyckva-skógr, Haukadalr, Breiðafiaorðr (W.), II. 15. 10.




Æ


Ægis-dyrr, Vestmanna-eyjar (S.), V. 3. 7.

Ægis-síða, N. of Hólar in Vestrhóp, III. 3. 1.

Ævars-skarð, Skagafiaorðr (N.), III. 6. 1.







Oxford: Printed at the Clarendon Press, by Horace Hart, M.A.










[**ERROR: unhandled comment start]

CHECKLIST (X = done; / = not applicable)

Initial cleanup

[ ] Check all pb-tags, and join lines
[ ] Move all footnotes in-line
[ ] Tag headers
[X] Fix all [** Proofer comments]
[ ] Start all paragraphs with the p-tag
[ ] Change b, sc, g tags to hi tags with correct attributes.
[ ] Change tb tags to milestone tags.
[ ] Fix multiple spaces in a row
[ ] Verify all paragraphs start with p-tag, also those starting with
a tag.

TEI header

[ ] Add TEI header.
[ ] Fill in details in TEI header
[ ] Verify Author dates and add to TEI header.
[ ] Document on-line scan sources.
[ ] Fill in description in noteStmt.
[ ] Fill in keywords / Subjects
[ ] Add auto-generated colophon divGen tag.
[ ] Fill in reference to LOC record (http://catalog.loc.gov/).
[ ] Fill in reference to OpenLibrary record (http://openlibrary.org).
[ ] Fill in reference to WorldCat record (source and work)
(http://www.worldcat.org).
[ ] Generate unique epub-id. (http://www.guidgenerator.com/)

Verse

[ ] Tag all verse.
[ ] Apply proper indentation: rend="indent(2)"

Lists

[ ] Tag all lists.

Tables

[ ] Format tables
[ ] Apply ditto-tags.

Table of Contents

[ ] Format table(s) of contents
[ ] Link entries in table of contents
[ ] Verify each link
[ ] Compare with generated table of contents

Images

[ ] Include all illustrations
[ ] Verify positioning of images makes sense.

Spelling

[ ] Verify generated wordlist
[ ] Tag language usage

Tools

[ ] Verify Gutcheck
[ ] Verify jeebees

Miscellany

[X] Check for [Greek: ...] notation
[ ] Curlify quotes
[ ] Check for wrong quotes
[ ] Disambiguate single quotes, apostrophes, and primes.
[ ] Unwrap lines
[ ] Check for lines not unwrapped
[ ] Verify sequence of page-numbers
[ ] Handle fractions, such as 1/2.  ([0-9])\-([0-9])/([0-9]) becomes
\1\&frac\2\3;
[ ] Converted all fragments in uppercase to mixed case.

Text Version

[ ] Remove FIGURE notations
[ ] Verify empty lines between chapter headings
[ ] Verify empty lines around poetry and lists
[ ] Center poetry
[ ] Format title page
[ ] Remove Ads
[ ] Format Tables
[ ] Verify Greek and other transliterations

Additional Checks and Edits (Add as needed for a specific book)

[ ] ....

Post-Posting

[ ] Update status to 1.0 (i.e. Posted).
[ ] Include PG number and posting date in metadata

-->


NOTES

[1] 5. þá es ... lengst] add. S* (Fl.-book).

[2] 11. an] add. S. af Norege, S.

[3] 15. þeir er, S.

[4] 16. Þat ... Papyle] om. S.

[5] 13. Sniofallz, H.

[6] 15-19. Interpolation, instead of which S reads:--En sva er sagt,
ef siglt er or Bíorgvin rétt í vestr til Hvarfsins á Groenlande, at
þá man siglt vera tylft fyrir sunnan Ísland. ... But it is so said,
that if one sail out of Beorgwin [Bergen] right west to the Wharf in
Greenland, that the course will be a twelve days' sail [i. e. about
fifty sea miles] to the south of Iceland.

[7] 20. Naddoðr] S; Naddoddr, H.

[8] 1. fritt, Cd.

[9] 5. líkenda] S; tíðenda, Cd.

[10] 10. Snió-, Cd.

[11] 6. ro] ero, Cd.

[12] Flóke] Faxe, Cd.

[13] 9. til] added; om. Cd.

[14] 5. Móðer Leifs ... Kára sonar] add. Floam. S.

[15] 14. roðnaðe] á at sea, add. S.

[16] 15. þar at boðeno] add. S.

[17] 17. at fara í h. ok æ. til m., S.

[18] 19. at] þeim, add. S.

[19] 8. skip] er þeir áttu, add. S.

[20] 14. í hernað, add. S.

[21] 15. vápne] sverði, S.

[22] 17. annat] af hm, S.

[23] 19. tio] tva, Cd. badly; x. S.

[24] 20. Drafdittar, S.

[25] 3. S; skip sítt, H.

[26] 19. af] á, S.

[27] 20. Min-, S.

[28] 21. þar] þá, add. S (badly?).

[29] 7. es] ef, S.

[30] 9. um] í, S.

[31] 11. fé] lausa-fe, S.

[32] 8. þrælarner] S; þeir, H.

[33] 13. Blank space in H.

[34] 20. miðle ok ... nes út] S; ok millim hrana gioll nes út, H,
miswritten.

[35] 3. at Vífils-toftom, S.

[36] 9. fyrstr, S.

[37] 13. være] var, S.

[38] 14. á Islande] om. S.

[39] 14. at þvi ... doeme til] add. S.

[40] 15. bana-sótt, S.

[41] 20. Sigurðr ... goða] om. S.

[42] 2. hersess or Sogne] S; k's (= konungs), H.

[43] 20. Emend.; sam-feðre, Cd.

[44] 1. með ráðe Ingolfs] add. S.

[45] 5. ritað, Cd.

[46] 7. útan ... Berbeinn] om. S.

[47] 15. efter] here comes a single vell. leaf.

[48] 4. kn'far, vell.

[49] 12. vixlo, vell.

[50] 6. land] ok voru komnir vestr um landit, add. S.

[51] 7. patrex, vell.

[52] 11. lið] allt, H.

[53] 6. hin Gamla, H.

[54] 8. Catanese] Englande, H; Svartkell het maðr Katneskr, hann fór
til Ísl., S.

[55] 9. Thus, not Myrdals, vell.

[56] 11. baðs, vell.

[57] 12. orvm, vell.

[58] 19. Fors-ár] Botzar, S.

[59] 1. son] here ends the vell. leaf.

[60] 3. Nú ero ... frá hónom] add. S.

[61] 9. á Alftanese ... Molda-Gn. d.] add. S.

[62] 11. S here inserts the clause on Colgrim.

[63] 8. Hann kom út ... mat at þ.] add. S.

[64] 14. Ion, Cd.

[65] 21 í munk-lífe xix vettr] add. according to Hungrvaka.

[66] 8. út] útan, Cd.

[67] 9. Sniofiallz, Cd.

[68] 12. iij, Cd.

[69] 14. Blank for a word.

[70] 15. xxx] i. e. þrítoga.

[71] 16. son] om. Cd.

[72] 1. steins] .... steins (blank) in Cd.

[73] 6. Hraða] Brannz sonar, Cd.

[74] 8. Ió-st.] S; Holmsteins, Cd., see below, line 20; links seem
here to be missing.

[75] 21. Þorg. H. vas .... gótt] add. S.

[76] 5. þar] S; ser, Cd.

[77] 6. laond í Floa] add. S.

[78] 22. Thorbenus, Spec. Isl. Hist. (Arngrim).

[79] 2. -gils, S.

[80] 6. Reykjar-, S.

[81] 3. Goðþormr] emend.; Guðbonn, S.   Þórnýjar] Þorvnyar, S.

[82] 10. Trandar-holt, Spec.

[83] 14. Spec.; Svarð-kell, S.

[84] 18. Hoensa Þoris, S.; miswritten blaanda, S.

[85] 21. Thorrida, Spec.

[86] 17. Kole, S.

[87] 1. Here H resumes.

[88] 14. S; Golldins, Cd.

[89] 9. hann] Illogi, S.

[90] 11. Reykjadal, S.

[91] 16. kaupit, S.

[92] 17. Oddi, S.

[93] 18. Hrólfr] S; hann, Cd. Ballár, S.

[94] 2. bygðan] S; bygt, Cd.

[95] 3. Suðreyskr] at ætt, add. S.

[96] 9. frillo, Cd.

[97] 15. ok ofan um Gr. ok Solmundar-hofða, S.

[98] 12. sonar] om. S.

[99] 16. Hrosskels-st., M.

[100] 20. This § we have moved two §§ up.

[101] 1. S; Bolverk, Cd.

[102] 7. frá] með, S.

[103] 11. í] frá, S. Nit-, H; Hvít-, S.

[104] 15. Nitbiarga, H; Hvít-, S.

[105] 18. ok] om. S.

[106] 4. Háleyska] son Þóres Gunlaugs sonar, Hrolfs sonar, Ketils
sonar Kiolfara, Hromundar sonar, add. S (see p. 37).

[107] 9. ritað, Cd.

[108] 13. Israuðr, Cd.

[109] 14. oefra] Nyrðra, S.

[110] 15. Horð-hóla, S.

[111] 19. Stiornu ... Brækiss] S; hildi stiorn s. brokiss, H.

[112] 1. -hoggvi, S.

[113] Hrifla] S; Rifla, Cd.

[114] 12. sonar] Here is blank for a word in S.

[115] 15. From ok Þorvallz ... son, add. M*.

[116] 19. ero kend Gísla-votn, S.

[117] 21. S; Helgu, Cd.

[118] 4. I. e. Sanddal.

[119] 9. ritað, Cd.

[120] 15. S; Hoelga-vatne, H.

[121] 6. Emend.; Þ. fell á Vindlandi í orr., M*.

[122] 17. Þoraddz, Cd.

[123] 11. S as well as Eg. Saga calls Thore Thurs and Thord Beigalde.

[124] 12. Eg. Saga; Holom, Cd.

[125] 15. upp frá ... með] Eg. Saga; fyr sunnan Langá, H; upp með
L., S.

[126] 18. ofan með Langá, milli ok Hafrs-loekjar, S; Háfs-, Eg. Saga.

[127] §§ 9, 10 are taken from Egils Saga.

[128] 7. út til, S.

[129] 14. Son ... Sterke] add. S.

[130] 16. Hit-ár] thus Cd. at leyfi Sk.-Gr.] add. S.

[131] 1. &#x16C9; , Cd.

[132] 5. Þorgeirs syner ... Torbe] add. S.

[133] 9. S, S* (Grett. S.), om. Þorer.

[134] 11. Þorarens, S, S*.

[135] 12. ok] here is a blank in S.

[136] 15. bygt hafa] land hafa numit, S.

[137] 16. Here comes a single vell. leaf.

[138] 1. um haustit, S.

[139] 3. soel-, vell, marmennil] S; margmelli, vell.

[140] 6. boelg-, vell.

[141] 8. Ecke ... hónom] add. S.

[142] 17. vóro] stóðu fyrir, S.

[143] 19. Knappa-dal] ok Laxár, add. H; Þorer nam land fyr n. Kn.,
á mille Kaldár, ok Lax-ár, mille fiallz ok f., M*.

[144] 22. Kaldarár-ós, vell.

[145] 3. S; ok brann hraun, H.

[146] 6. Þeirra syner ... Þórer] add. S.

[147] 8. Þor­biorg, S.

[148] 13. Hitar-ár] thus, vell.

[149] 20. Hann, above the line.

[150] 1. hann ... Goðe] add. S.

[151] 4. S; ok d. Þóriðar, vell. (badly). Oddz] Oz, vell.

[152] 21. Stote, S.

[153] 14. ok bauð hverjom] ok laðaðe þar geste hvern es m. v. eta, S.

[154] 19. með vii. mann, above the line.

[155] 11. en þrælar hans ii. runno frá hónom, S.

[156] 12. geck] here ends the vell. leaf.

[157] 17. svá vítt, S.

[158] 22. § 4 is taken from S.

[159] 1. Einars] blank in S.

[160] 7. Tinnz] add. M*; blank in S.

[161] 9. Finn-varðr ... þeirra] add. S.

[162] 20. Þat kvað ... hringinn Korna] add. M*.

[163] 6. es átte Þórríðe dóttor ... Mosf. vas dótter þeirra] add. S.

[164] 17. Guðlaugr, S (but Gunnl. below).

[165] 20. This § is taken from S.

[166] 3. tolftar-kviðar] tolftar-kuaud, S.

[167] 1. Kvern-] S; kven-, Cd.

[168] 3. hann vá biorninn í einvige, M*.

[169] 6. hokin-] holkin-, Cd.

[170] geitr á] S; geit við, Cd.

[171] 13. dótter] add. S.

[172] 14. S; Sponu, Cd.

[173] 16. nam Eyrar-land ok Kirkju-fiorð, ok bió..., S.

[174] 20. ok þeirra ... Stota] add. S.

[175] 1. Þormods s. Goða] add. S.

[176] 11. Beadmacs] Maddaðar, S.

[177] 13. ok vas ... sterkr] add. S.

[178] 14. Thus Cd.; hiarðar-vatne, S.

[179] 18. steig] S; ste, Cd.

[180] 19. vatz upp] vatzins, S.

[181] 15. Borgar-loek] því at hann einn var óskírðr barna Ketils
Flatnefs, add. S.

[182] 19. feck] tók, S.

[183] 2. S; Selja-, Cd.

[184] 6. f. Jons ... Erki-byskops] om. S.

[185] 9. Þórðar Kattar] om. H. S counts backwards, Gellis ok B. ok
Þorleiks, ok Þ. Kattar.

[186] 11. átte Ástríðe] skipped in Cd.

[187] 14. faðer Þórleiks] S; p Þorleiks s., Cd.

[188] 4. í nesi einu, S.

[189] 10. á fiall þat, S.

[190] 11. -fiall, Cd.

[191] 18. eigi] víst eigi, S.

[192] 20. First written 'saurgast,' and st blotted out.

[193] 7. þá vas] emend.; var þá, Cd. S; uhælgaðr, Cd.

[194] 10. Þorstein, S.

[195] 11. blóta] er menn skyldo til blótz dæma, S.

[196] 3. S; skipara, Cd.

[197] 5. um] uppi um, S.

[198] 9. Geirraðar, Cd.

[199] 14. hon sat ... matr á] add. S.

[200] 6. sonar] f. (i. e. foðors), Cd.; om. S.

[201] 10. Arnbiaorn] hann, add. Cd., badly.

[202] 12. Helgo] add. S.

[203] 22. S; H omits 'Eindriðe and Geller'

[204] 2. Bergr] Bergþor, S. Þorláks sonar] add. S.

[205] 4. Colle] Kollr, S.

[206] 6. -myrks, S.

[207] 7. es nam] í, S.

[208] 9. logmaðr, Cd.

[209] 13. bioggo] S; bygðo, Cd.

[210] 16. laund, S.

[211] 3. Tauðom, S.

[212] 10. Æso son] add. Eyrb. ch. 24.

[213] 16. Þórbiaorn] Eric Red's Saga; Þorgeirr, H, S.

[214] 21. Sniofallz-, Cd.

[215] 22. Hann fór ... byggjanda] add. S.

[216] 1. Hann siglðe vestr um Hvarf] om. S.

[217] 2. miðre enne] add. S, S*.

[218] Eystre-] H, S*; vestre, S (badly).

[219] 4. bústað] Hann fór þat sumar í vestre Obygð, add. S.

[220] 9. Íslannz] ok kom, add. S.

[221] 16. Sva segja fróðer menn, S.

[222] 18. sextán] xv, S.

[223] 20. frænda ... yngre] S.

[224] 1. Heriolfs sonar; hann fór til Gr., H.

[225] 10. er þa fóro út með Eir., S.

[226] 11. Heriolfr ... Heriolfs-nese] add. S.

[227] 18. miðle ok] ok miðle, Cd.; ok víðast milli, S.

[228] 19. Hvals-eyjar-firðingar] thus H and S.

[229] 1. sæ-færi, S.

[230] 3. sýslor] hýbýli, S.

[231] 6. bioggo] bió, Cd.

[232] Holms-látre] S; Hvallátre, Cd.

[233] 12. Borgfirðinga-] emend. by conj.; Breidfirðinga kynsloð, H.

[234] 14. Olafs, Cd.

[235] 18. -úðgo] -auðgu, S.

[236] Biarnar sonar ... Norege] add. S*.

[237] 20. þau] Eric Red's Saga.

[238] 3. dótter, Cd. Olof, Cd.

[239] 4. lags] S*; (Eric Red's Saga); liðs, Cd.; felags, S.

[240] Sigroeðe] Sigurðe, S; om. Cd.

[241] 6. Merhæfi, S.

[242] 9. vas] goerðesk, S.

[243] 10. hon] hann, S.

[244] 18. Sígurðe, Cd. Ríka, Cd.

[245] 2. laugo] thus H and S; read hauptom?

[246] 6. Alofu, S.

[247] 8. Vikars-, Cd.; Vikrar-, S.

[248] 10. helming, S (better).

[249] 12. á] í, S.

[250] 16. aóto] atto, Cd.

[251] sunnan] norðan, S.

[252] 20. Dala-laond] here two leaves are missing in H, covering the
remnant of this chapter and the whole of the 16th; thus far the text
is therefore taken from S.

[253] 5. þar goerr haorgr] þá gor haurg, S.


[**ERROR: Contains unhandled entity &hstrok;]
[254] 6. áðr syner hans toeke m.] emend.; áðr &hstrok; tok, S (aðr
. ss. &hstrok; . toeke, Archetype); S* omits the clause.

[255] 13. Spelt Haurdr and Haurdadal, S.

[256] 16. átte] blank for a line left in S.

[257] 17. Vifill, S here.

[258] 19. oengo] S*; eigi, S.

[259] 2. son Vívils] hann átte þá kono es het (blank); þeirra syner,
etc., S* (Eric Red's Saga).

[260] 5. Lón-Einars] thus S; read Laugar-brecko-Einars.

[261] 9. S*; Saud-kolfr, S (badly); spelt au in S.

[262] 10. komet] the last line of the paragraph left blank in S.

[263] 17. Skate] thus S, as it seems.

[264] 1. ... ] blank for half a line in S.

[265] 11. Collr ... Laxárdal] by emendation; left blank in S.

[266] 16. Slettu-, S.

[267] 18. Oláfr, S, here and below.

[268] 20. Ceartan] Egill, adds S*.

[269] 23. syner] son (s. for ss.), S.

[270] 9. Odda syne] add. Egils Saga.

[271] 11. Þórgerðar] add. from Laxdæla Saga.

[272] 18. Mar, S.

[273] 5. Emend.; Þorsnes-þ., S.

[274] 13. See v. 13. 1, Asdisar, S.

[275] 16. es átte ... Feilans vas] supplied from Laxdæla Saga; for
here the scribe of S must have skipped a whole paragraph, containing a
set of pedigrees; the bits in italics are filled in from other sources.

[276] 6. Blank in S.

[277] 11. Þórríðr] Þórdis, Laxd. Saga, ch. 12.


[**ERROR: Contains unhandled entity &rcomb;]
[278] 6. syner vóro] son var, S (s. v&rcomb;. for ss. v&ocomb;).

[279] 7. Orastoðum, S (badly); see Sturl. vii. ch. 330.

[280] 11. leysingi Ceallacs] thus, Cirialaci libertus, Spec. (H*)
maðr, S.

[281] 12. Kadda kin, S.

[282] 15. ok Vífill vin þ.] M*; V. var v. þeirra, S.

[283] 19. þá gaf ... ey] entered in a wrong place.

[284] 20. henni] emend.; birne, S.

[285] eðr] áðr?

[286] 1. eyna] emend.; hann, S.

[287] skip] emend.; fe, S.

[288] 3. sótto ... Hrafsa] emend.; stuckn þeir Eilifr ok Hrafsi, S.

[289] Or kom ... Liótolfs son] add. M* (from H*, though corrupt);
read, Hr(afsi) kom í gegn Eilífi pruda, ok...?

[290] 5. Ceallacs syne] add. M* (H*).

[291] 7. hann vas þá vii vetra] add. M* (H*).

[292] 10. Hrafse geck inn ... sótto hann] according to H* (M*). Much
shorter and dilapidated in S--Hrafse gekk inn á Arastauðum at boðe,
hann var í kvenn fötum. Kiallakr sat á palle með skiolld ((First
written felld, and since underlined.)) . Hrafse hió hann Asbiorn
bana haugg ok gekk út um veg. Þórðr Vifelsson sagðe Hrafsa at yxin
(!) hans lægi í keldu; hann bar skiold huns. Hrafse fleygðe honum
fyrir kleif er hann sá Kiallaks sonu; eigi gátu þeir hann (sic)
áðr þeir feldu vidu at honum. Eilífr sat hiá er þeir hann (!).

[293] 5. Here H resumes the text.

[294] 9. Alfs-reckom, S.

[295] 13. Liufvinu, S.

[296] 20. skynja] S; skoða, Cd.

[297] 6. Faodde þýr ... verre] emend.; fæðat þu þann kona, faer munu
verri, S; fæd þu kona feordr man hann verri, H.

[298] 7. þann es] þann, S; þar, Cd.

[299] 9. sono sina] sveinana, S.

[300] 22. Þeir G. hofðo] S; Þeir Þrondr miobeinn þeir hofðu, Cd.

[301] 4. Klofsteina, S.

[302] 6. Geirmunde ... Skarðe] add. S.

[303] 10. Maðr hét Þróndr ... Ogðom] add. S.

[304] 13. Napp-, Cd.

[305] 15. Ingialldr] Ingiallz s. var s., Cd.

[306] 3. vas sonr] vóro syner, S.

[307] 6. ok v. et m. afar-m.] add. S.

[308] 7. Guðmundr] S; Sigmundr, Cd.

[309] 15. tolf] xii, Cd.; xiiii, S.

[310] 5. sá] þar, add. Cd.

[311] 11. Síðan átte hann ... Geirríðr ok (blank)] add. S.

[312] 13. lagðr ... garðe] S; heygðr í skipe þar út frá garde, Cd.

[313] 3. Ernyju, S.

[314] 7. þeirra d. Halla ... Húnboga s.] add. S.

[315] 10. tveimr] ij, Cd.

[316] 13. Rather than Sletto-?

[317] 17. at] aa, Cd.

[318] 21. geriz, Cd.; goerdiz, S.

[319] 10. Osvifs, S.

[320] 13. tottogo] x, S.

[321] 14. eyrinne, S.

[322] 20. This paragraph added from S.

[323] 9. sæ-hafe] S; sæfare, Cd.

[324] 10. Vínlande] Vindlande, Cd.

[325] 12. þessa sogo sagðe fyrst, S.

[326] 14. Gellis-son] S; Geitis-s., Cd. (badly).

[327] 15. frá segja] add. S.

[328] 16. néðe, S.

[329] 18. í] or, S.

[330] 7. Þorskafiord, S.

[331] 10. lx] lxiii, Cd.

[332] 14. Þá sende ... hagfarm] H omits this clause; it is corrupt, and
can only partly be mended--'Þar haufdu Þr. Hallsteins hæla hagfarm,' S.

[333] 17. Þorsteinn Surtr átte ... baornom Þórarens] add. S. átte
...] blank for name in S.

[334] 6. Rognvallz s. iarls] add. S.

[335] 11. ok dóttor] thus.

[336] 12. vas Þórðr] S; om. Cd.

[337] 6. Snió-fellz, Cd.

[338] 11. Þrælar ... kvómo] En meðan Ketill var vestr hliópu þrælar
hans á braut ok kvómu, S.

[339] 13. ok Þórdísar ... sonar] add. S.

[340] 15. S; eitt búr, Cd. S; mikla í, Cd.

[341] 16. Síðan ... klyfjoðo] add. S.

[342] 2. Cetill ok Y ... Þióstars sonar] add. S.

[343] 3. Odde] Egils Saga, ch. 80, calls him Vale.

[344] 7. ok Cvíganda-nes] add. S.

[345] 11. Þórlakr, Cd.

[346] 13. S; Knutr, Cd. (badly).

[347] 14. ok bió] add. S, leaving a blank for the name.

[348] 1. logm, Cd.; S om. ok Herdísar ... Logmaðr.

[349] 7. Thus S; Eyjo?

[350] 5. þeirra syner ... felle] add. S (writing Berufelli).

[351] 9. Arnórs ok] add. S.

[352] 14. Þaðan ero ...] add. S; thus, M. Kotlo, S.

[353] 19. skarfs?

[354] 4. Æsi-, S.

[355] 7. Groa ...] this paragraph is only preserved in M.

[356] 10. fostr-f., S.

[357] 16. ok bió at Hval-laotrom] add. S.

[358] 19. Baoðvars] add. S.

[359] 4. hann vas ... skinnz] add. S.

[360] 6. Hann nam land í Arnarfirðe svá vítt sem hann vilde, S.

[361] 11. enn Harfagra, add. S.

[362] 16. ok f. h. þangat] add. S.

[363] 19. Dufane ... -dal] Dufan var leysingi Anarr hann bió eptir
í Dufans-dal, S.

[364] 20. móðor] emend.; z (z = m), Cd.; om. S.

[365] 1. es átte ... Eyþ. son] add. S.

[366] 9. Valgerde, S.

[367] 22. er átte ... iarls] om. S.

[368] 8. þeirra baorn ... Auðr] add. S.

[369] 10. Gísli, ok Þorkell, ok Are, S.

[370] 13. Síðan átte Þ ... at Fróð-aó add. S.

[371] 16. ágætr] add. S.

[372] 21. Þ. h. m. V. s. eðr s. H. ks. Hárf.; hann fór til Isl. ok
nam land milli þúfu, etc., S.

[373] 3. dóttor Eyv. Austmannz] add. S.

[374] 4. síðan] Hann átte, add. S, leaving blank for the name.

[375] 8. baorn] thus, S.

[376] 7. en dótter Þóra ... Fiðr átte] add. S.

[377] 12. dóttor Nesja-kniuks, S.

[378] 14. Ottk., Cd.

[379] 16. ok Úfoero] til Úfæro, S. Hann vas faðer ... Liótz] S;
hann var f. Þorgríms f. Þorbiarnar Skumo, f. Liótz, H.

[380] 18. Chapter 24. 1-2 is taken from S; H omits it.

[381] 6. Gersoeme. Loékr ...] thus emend, according to Havarðar
Saga; ok galt læk er fell meðal landa þeira, sá hét osóme, S; see
notes. Havarðar Saga--"Þeir Liótr ok Þorbiorn [Grímr] átto eitt
veite-enge báðer saman, var þat et (!) mesta gerseme ... En sa loekr
féll fyrir neðan boe Liótz er fell á engit á vórit; vóro þar í stíflur
ok vel um buit.' The meadow, not the brook, took the name Jewel.

[382] 13. at] af, S.

[383] 15. frægra] frægan, S.

[384] 8. en] er, S.

[385] 16. at haofðe] emend.; af h., S. kvað ... lítt] emend.; bað þá
láta gott, S.

[386] 3. til Stiga, ok b. þar] add. S.

[387] 4. S interchanges §§ 3 and 4.

[388] 8. seið] seidde, S.

[389] 9. sílð] fiskom, S.

[390] 13. -fialle, Cd.

[391] 6. es hann ... mannenn] add. S.

[392] 9. S; Onundr, Cd.

[393] 11. faðer Hallgr., ok Gunnars] add. S.

[394] 12. Biargeyjar] S; Biargey, Cd.

[395] 16. Vebiorn, S; om. Cd.  Svigna-, S.

[396] 18. Efter ... fóro] add. S; þau systkin fóro, H.

[397] 4 í Flióte] add. S.

[398] 14 S; gengr, Cd.

[399] 19 & fiorðungs-þingi á Þórsnese, S (erroneously?).

[400] 3. Augrs-vík, H; Augr-vík, S.

[401] 6. Snuinbroc, S.

[402] 8. ecke] S; upp, Cd.

[403] 13. fiórer] þrír, S.

[404] 21. þrír (iii)] S; iiij, Cd., see below.

[405] 2. Síðan ... aptr] add. S. Here a whole paragraph seems missing.

[406] 13. Siaómk af svikom] conject.; foes mek af sliki, Cd.; se ek
af sliku, S.

[407] 19. Goe] gie, Cd.

[408] 2. af hans hende Rolfs, Cd.

[409] 12. hnauckotta, S.

[410] 14. Þorb.] S; hann, Cd.

[411] 19. Þóríðe] Þóru, S.

[412] 20. systor V.] add. S.

[413] 21. Þórhrolfr, S.

[414] 1. Íslannz] með ráðe Harallz konungs, add. S.

[415] 3. faðer] es átte, S.

[416] 8. dóttor Ó., systor] S; H om. systor.

[417] 11. Geirmundar] something is missing here. Nú ... Horn]
add. S. es nú ero aim.] added by conject., ch. 17. 6 above.

[418] 3. This § is taken from S; om. H. Ásvallz son] a blank left
for a name in S, but nothing is missing.

[419] 7. Hvita-ský, S.

[420] 14. hrænom] S; brotunom, H.

[421] 16. Gerpis ok Grímolfs] add. S.

[422] 6. Steinmóðr Olafsson, S.

[423] 9. at] aa, Cd. es þar bió ... at sýn] add. M*.

[424] 11. Trolle] add. by conj.

[425] 14. Þorhrolfs ok Þór. Tosta (better?), S.

[426] 20. Gisl, S.

[427] 21. kom, Cd.; komz, S.

[428] 6. S; Klæings, Cd. Hann var á mót Haralde konunge í Hafrs-firðe;
efter þat fór hann til Ísl. ok nam, S.

[429] 11. sem fyrr es ritið] (II. 4. 3) om. S, putting instead the
clause, en síðan nam ... Gamla.

[430] 18. Greniuðr, S. Hokins, S.

[431] 19. Frá Gren ... frá Þreste] add. S.

[432] 2. enn] add. S.

[433] 3. Þórkels] S; Þoris, Cd. (badly).

[434] 19. xv, S (better).

[435] 2. aðrer sex] aðrer m (vi), Cd.

[436] 16. tívar ... ] two strophes, to which S adds four (all
manufactured stuff).

[437] 3. S adds this paragraph; om. H.

[438] The writer of the second half of Haward Saga, who must have had
before him a better text than ours, gives this account of Leot and
Thorbeorn's quarrel:--Thorbeorn was the name of a man that lived at
the place called Eyre. He was a wealthy man in chattels and was fallen
into the decline of years, and a close man in his disposition. He had
two sons; the one named Grim, the other Thorstan. It is told so, that
Leot and Thorbeorn owned in common [lit. both together] a water-meadow
[trenched and watered artificially]. It was the greatest jewel or
treasure. It was so shared between them that each man had it summer
about; but the brook fell down below Leot's homestead, which ran over
the meadow in the spring. There were dams in it, and it was cared
for. It went ever so, that when Thorbeorn had to have the meadow he
could not get at the brook, and so it went that Leot got to letting
the words fall that Thorbeorn had no right to the meadow, and should
not dare to claim it, etc.--Ch. 14, History of Howard the Icefrith-man.

[439] 7. fiórðunge] es fiol-bygðastr hefir veret af aollo Íslande,
ok stoerstar Saogor hafa goerzk bæðe at forno ok nýjo, sem enn mon
ritið verða, ok raun berr á, add. S: i.e. which hath been the thickest
settled of all parts of Iceland, and in which the greatest histories
have taken place, both old and new, which shall be written below and
proof given thereof.

[440] 11. Rauðs] rauz, Cd.

[441] 13. land í Hrúta-firðe, S.

[442] 16. es orte O.-visor] add. M*.

[443] 17. Gamla son ... Munks] add. S; er átte Skegge Hoelge
Skammhondungr, Cd. (sic).

[444] 4. Skutaðar, S.

[445] 7. Miðf.-Sk.; hann vas] om. H.

[446] 8. ok farmaðr] add. S.

[447] 13. varðe hann] emend.; vardiz, Cd.

[448] 16. es átte ... dóttor] add. S, leaving the name blank, which
is here supplied by S* (Barð. Saga); þeir Eiðr ok Collr, H.

[449] 1. þeirra syner ... Ketill] add. S.

[450] 5. þar nær ... Hring-staðer] S; þar sem heita Hr., H.

[451] 6. útan] om. Cd. vestan] austan, S.

[452] 7. þannvegar, Cd.

[453] 9. Prúða] thus.

[454] ok Þórgeirs ... Óse] add. S.

[455] 1. Goðbr. K. þ. d.] left blank in Cd.

[456] 2. Helga] two lines left blank in Cd.

[457] 11. Beiar-, Cd.

[458] 13. Þórvallz] Þóroddz, S.

[459] 14. Tanna, S.

[460] 16. hann vas son ... norðan or Norege] add. S.

[461] 1. Þórsteinn] S; om. Cd.

[462] 8. at þá munde horfenn hlutr or p. hans, S. finnaz, S.

[463] 9. á landeno] add. S.

[464] 10. Vestr-víking] íafnan, add. S.

[465] 12. geck til lannz ok] add. S.

[466] 21. Ingimunde] add. S.

[467] 1. þriggja] tveggja, S.

[468] 4. ok Hvate viner hans] S; hinn Hvate vinr hans, Cd.

[469] 6. fyr s. land] add. S.

[470] 12. S; sniólaus, Cd.

[471] þangat] þannveg, S.

[472] 1. This § from S.

[473] 3. of] ok, Cd.; um, S.

[474] 8. hvíta] add. S.

[475] 13. land] add. S.

[476] 18. kómo út ok] add. S.

[477] 22. í Svína- dale] add. S.

[478] 9. Una-dal, S, less right, the full name being Unadh-.

[479] 13. sem vatn-föll deildo, S.


[**ERROR: Contains unhandled entity &mmmacr;]
[480] 17. ganga fyrer] Hofs&mmmacr;., add. Cd.

[481] 5. aondoge] hásæte, S.

[482] 6. S; Sæmundar, Cd.

[483] 9. S; kvað kveðnar, Cd. (badly).

[484] 14. sásk] saðs, Cd.

[485] 2. Emend. (MS. Biorn Olsen); Undun-felle, H, S.

[486] 12. Skokle, S.

[487] 14. sem ... ritið] add. S.

[488] 18. Slettu-, Cd.

[489] 3. Kolkr, S (badly).

[490] 4. meðan h. l.] add. S.

[491] 5. Ævarr átte (blank) þeirra son vas Vefreyðr; syner Ævars
laun-getner vóro þeir Karle, etc., S (better?).

[492] 13. en er hann kom ... sette hann, etc., S. þar] om. Cd.

[493] 20. S; húsunum, Cd.

[494] 6. Hauks-grafer, S.

[495] 18. faðer Þ.... átte] blank in Cd.; faðer Þórðar í Vatz-firðe,
filled in from Sturl. vii. ch. 1; the rest from S.

[496] 1. inn] add. S.

[497] 4. ok broeðra hans] add. S.

[498] 12. ok Þórsteins ... Fliótom] add. S.

[499] 20. roprekr, Cd.

[500] 1. S; Roreks, Cd.

[501] 4. spurðe] S; spottaðe, Cd.

[502] 4. S; Rærex, Cd.

[503] 15. Sunnlendinga fiórðungs, S.

[504] 18. S; Rohallz, Cd.

[505] 19. um Goðdale alla, S.

[506] 4. Gunnillde ... Ævars son] add. S.

[507] 6. Úfeigs] Olafs, S.

[508] 7. bioggo ... ok] add. S.

[509] 10. heita] S; leita, Cd.

[510] 12. landa ef] S; er, Cd.

[511] 19. þvi at ... þesso] add. S.

[512] 21. úheyrt] S; eigi ráð, Cd.

[513] 3. S; stafni, Cd.

[514] 4. -sand ... sonom] add. S.

[515] 5. þá] Þektiz, S.

[516] 9. kuge, S.

[517] 12. nema land um dalenn allan, S.

[518] 13. at hann ... víss] add. S.

[519] 20. Aurrek, S.

[520] 3. upp frá] here come in 7 continuous vellum leaves.

[521] 5. Þórer] S; Þórðr, H, here and once below.

[522] 11. síðan] add. S.

[523] 20. ser þar] scalfr, add. S.

[524] 3. vas foerðr] S; fór, vell.

[525] 4. S; Mors, vell.

[526] 9. Sunnolfr, S.

[527] 11. Svi-þioð, S.

[528] 12. at] S; af, vell.

[529] 13. hans] þeirra, S. Elinu] S; Eilinu, vell.

[530] 14. Ingigerðar] S; Ingibiargar, H.

[531] 14. Risa-] thus H, S; read Rúsa or Rósa?

[532] 18. fyrst] add. S.

[533] 20. Hans son vas] hann átte (blank), þeirra, etc., S.

[534] 1 Skapls] Skafls s., vell.; Skalfs s., S.

[535] 6 út] S; inn, H.

[536] 7 S reverses 'eystra megin' and 'vestra megin.'

[537] 10 svarbaðar, S.

[538] 13 Skapls] thus vell.; Skafls, S.

[539] 15 Þórðr] Grett. Saga (S*) names two sons of his, Þorbiorn
Ongul and Healte, and a daughter Þórdís. ágæter menn] add. S.

[540] 20 á-nyt] thus also S and S* (Barðar Saga).

[541] 7. komen] ok gofug, add. S.

[542] 12. ok bió at] S; om. vell.

[543] 13. Hyrnu, S.

[544] 19. Halld. at Hofe] Grett. Saga (S*?) adds, Hann átte Þórdíse
Þórðar dóttor systur þeirra bræðra Hialta ok Þórbiarnar Onguls.

[545] 3. Vindlð, vell.

[546] 6. upp] add. S.

[547] 8. Skarfs-n., S.

[548] 11. Dagæ] thus vell.; Dade, S.

[549] 15. Giaflaug] Laxd. Saga, ch. 20; Gudlaug, Cd.

[550] 18. Ásgerðr fimta] om. Cd.

[551] 4. Flamsk, S.

[552] 11. Olleifr, vell.

[553] 14. Sygnskr] S; Sonskr, vell. (as it seems).  systor-son] son, S.

[554] 17. at] á, S.

[555] 2 Þórhrolfr, S.

[556] Arnórr] S; Arvn, vell.

[557] 4 Olhildr, S.

[558] 5 -má, vell.

[559] 10 hét maðr ágætr] add. S.

[560] 19 S; sva(rta), Cd., hole in the vellum.

[561] 20 Dala] thus vell.

[562] mólz] moðs, vell.

[563] 21 Steinmóðr, S.

[564] 1. Read Sygnskr? om. S.

[565] 2. Skialx, vell.

[566] 7. xvj, S.

[567] 9. es] en hann, S.

[568] 13. Þióz, vell.; Þióta, S.

[569] 15. austan] vestan, S. upp] add. S.

[570] 17. ok Þórer] S; om. H. (Þórg)rímr, hole in the vell.

[571] 1. Sigfast] S; Sigvat, vell. here, but Sigfast below. Solvers, S.

[572] 2. Gauta-kgs.] H, S; read Gauta iarls?

[573] helt iarlenn] hann helt, S.

[574] 7. foere] fór, vell.

[575] 15. á Ogðom] add. S.

[576] 4. Tveimr] ij, vell.

[577] 8. Eyvindr ... haf] transposed; vell. puts it after fóstrs.

[578] 12. Þróndr sonar son] emend.; s. s. (i. e. syner), vell.

[579] 13. systor-syne] emend.; sunar syne, Cd.

[580] 16. ok aótto þau m. b.] add. S.

[581] 19. land] Island, S.

[582] 2. Dums (not Dumbs-), H and S.

[583] 3. þvi at ... sumaret] add. S.

[584] 8. Sólar-fioll, S.

[585] 9. es þeir ... úte fyrer] add. S.

[586] 10. þá] þat, Cd.

[587] 11. en H. bió efter] add. S.

[588] 13. iii, Cd.

[589] 19. dax, vell.

[590] 20. ok kende ... bústað sínn] add. S.

[591] 16. son ... Naumo-dale] add. S.

[592] 19. S; Karsá, vell.

[593] 7. iamna] emend.; snoggvan, Cd.

[594] 10. Við bol buen, Cd. (badly).

[595] 13. Galmans-] Gamla-, Cd.

[596] 17. laond] om. Cd.

[597] 2. Krox, vell.

[598] 20. Galman] Galmr, S, here; but Galmans-strond below, both H
and S.

[599] 6. Haga'num, S.

[600] 13. Þórolfr, Cd.

[601] 18. illar vætter] emend.; aðrar vætter, H; aðrar mein vætter, S.

[602] 19. mein-] S.

[603] 6. Bægis-] 'æ,' not 'oe,' vell.

[604] 9. f. Einars ... iarls] om. S.

[605] 11. Randulfs s., S.

[606] 12. til Krækl.-hl.] add. S.

[607] 16. hann kom ... tíðar] add. S.

[608] 4. En es B.] repetition (but fuller) from ch. 13. 3.

[609] 19. -heito, vell.

[610] 1. Síðan r. þ. t. e.] added by conjecture; some such passage
is missing.

[611] 2. transposed and emend.; þeir h. m. tal í husonom; at þeir
hefði vereð um nóttena í ferð með A. iarle, Cd.

[612] 15. xxx, vell.

[613] 10. xxx, vell.

[614] 13. Ásgríme] emend.; epter á, Cd.

[615] 15. xl, vell.

[616] 17. Geirhilde, S.

[617] 3. § 6 is probably a repetition of ch. 14. 10.

[618] 7. vas e. h. son] add. S.

[619] 8. dótter] add. S.

[620] 10. upp] út, S.  Skialx-, vell.

[621] 11. Ketill] add. S.

[622] Steinolfr] Steinmóðr, S.

[623] 12. ok [Þórlaug] add. S.

[624] 13. Rotin] H and S.

[625] 2. Arnar-hvále, S.

[626] 13. noerðre] Eystre, S.

[627] 14. Fliokna-, vell.

[628] 19. Þorgnyns, vell.

[629] 2. skipverja] stafn-bua, S.

[630] 3. (  )] hole in the vell.

[631] 4. skipe síno í] S; á, vell.

[632] 10. Hniosk-, H and N.

[633] 14. S; -loðu, vell.

[634] 4. Snortr] S; Snorre, H (badly).

[635] 7. Ongley, S.

[636] 9. þar bió Nichulas Sigurðar son, add. M* (died 1176).

[637] 10. Loðinn O. ... son hans] S; Islannz ok dó í hafe, H.

[638] 13. Doetti-, Cd.

[639] 16. Kalborg-, S. breckum, S.

[640] 18. af þvi] add. S.

[641] heiðar] heiðe, S.

[642] 19. Goe-] Goe, vell.

[643] 1. S; kvikvende, vell. gegnt] (i.e. gengt), vell. and S. feallut,
vell.

[644] 6. Goðe] add. S.

[645] 9. Fiorleifo] S and Reykd. Saga; Freyleyfu, vell., but Fiorleif
below.

[646] 11. kogr, vell.; kavgur, S.

[647] 14. This § is taken from M*.

[648] 18. Torfa, S.

[649] 19. sumt um, S (sic).

[650] 1. Þórer ... skarð] S; om. H (a homoiotel.).

[651] 3. fyrr] fyrst, S.

[652] 4. syner vóro] S; son var, vell.

[653] 5. Kolgrímr, S. en dótter] S; ok, vell.

[654] 6. Alfgerðe, S.

[655] 9. Lecny, S.

[656] 11. fóro ... ok] add. S.

[657] 12. ofan] innan, S.

[658] heiðe] add. S.

[659] 16. -vík] om. H.

[660] 20. á] om. S.

[661] 21. Reykja-, S.


[**ERROR: Contains unhandled entity &acomb;]
[662] Vestm&acomb;z, and Vestm&rcomb;, vell.

[663] 1. Skratta-felle] Hann átte (blank); þeirra son, etc., S.

[664] 6. fýstesk ... skipe síno] S; Eyv. fór til Islanz ok nam, H.

[665] 16. ok lét ... -vík] add. S.

[666] 12. Hrauna-, vell.; Krava-, S.

[667] 17. S; Guðolfr, vell. Gríms] Orms, S (better?).

[668] 19. Þióðolfs] emend.; Þorolfs, vell, and S.

[669] 20. Boðolfs skytiu, vell.; Auðolfs staoðum, S (badly).

[670] 20. S; Valdíse, vell.

[671] 2. Þórvalldr] S; Hroaldr, vell. (badly).

[672] 5. hann vas ... mikill] add. S.

[673] 17. ackr-, vell.

[674] 19. hann vas faðer Þórarens] add. S.

[675] 5. Krox-, vell.

[676] 7. Osvífs, S.

[677] 9. oesko] S; elle, vell.

[678] 13. tveimr] ii, vell.

[679] 19. Grisar] S; Griss, vell.

[680] 21. es] þeir, S.

[681] 5. Odde, S.

[682] 8. Þeir Arng ... drepet þá] S; Hvita biorn drap þá bádá Arngeir
ok Þorgils: Oddr fór at leita þeirra, H.

[683] 10. ok só or þ. bl.] ok lá þá á pasti, S.

[684] 16. vildo berja grióte í hel, S.

[685] 2. S; Sniofallz-, vell.

[686] 3. S adds this paragraph.

[687] 4. Nú hefer ... Íslande] S inscribes it thus--Þesser menn hafa
land numet í Austfirðinga fiórðunge er nú munu upp talðer; ok ferr hvat
af hende norðan til fiórðunga mótz, frá Langanese á Sól-heima-sand. Ok
er þat sogn manna, at þessa fiórðungr hafe fyrst albygðr orðet. These
men have taken and settled land in the East-frith-folk Quarter, that
shall now be told: running point for point from the north to the
(southern) boundary or quarter from Langness to Sunhamsand; and it
is the saying of men that this quarter was the first fully peopled.

[688] 9. faðer Geirl.] add. S.

[689] 10. ok Við-fiaorð] add. S.

[690] 9. Stiku-, S.

[691] 13. Biola, S, H.

[692] 16. S; es átte Asolfr í Hofða, H.

[693] 17. Ósvallz] S; Olves, vell.

[694] 22. Sirex-, vell.

[695] 3. lx, vell.

[696] 4. maðr ok góðr] add. S.

[697] 11. S; d. Einars sælendings, H; cp. Liosv. S., ch. 25.

[698] 14. Biarnæ, vell.

[699] 16. broeðr] add. S.

[700] 21. es vá ... Atla sonar] add. S.

[701] 1. Þórkell] Þórer, S.

[702] 4. S; Hvamsár, H.

[703] 20. Þóroz, vell. S; Rangar, vell.

[704] 11. ij, vell.

[705] 12. fyrsto] S; mystu (sic), vell.

[706] 21. Oxnalæk, S.

[707] 1. gaofogr] add. S.

[708] 6. -fors-aó] ok, add. S.

[709] 11. f. Holm.] add. S.

[710] 15. S; hann gaf Brynjolfe, vell.

[711] 16. hann átte ... þriár] add. S.

[712] 18. S; Asroðr, vell.


[**ERROR: Contains unhandled entity &thornstrok;]
[713] 1. &thornstrok;az, vell.

[714] 11. vackn-, vell.

[715] 17. Danzski, vell. Gardaz, vell.

[716] 11. kononnar, S.

[717] 17. allan] add. S.

[718] 17. Arngunne] om. H, S; see Niala, ch. 19.

[719] 18. dóttor Hámundar] add. S.

[720] 2. Þvi] S; Þá, vell.

[721] 5. -skefte, S.

[722] 8. hans] here ends the last of the seven vell. leaves (see
Bk. III. 8. 7).

[723] 14. S; Þórhildr, Cd.

[724] 17. Arnbiarnar, S.

[725] 18. br. þ. Lýt.] add. S.

[726] 3. fyrer sagt heðan frá um landn., S.

[727] 9. troll-aukenn] rammauken miok ok fiol-kunnigr, S.

[728] 12. iii, Cd.; þenna, S.

[729] 13. þat ... átte] oll fong sín, S.

[730] 16. átt] buet á, S.

[731] 19. með lande allt] add. S.

[732] 5. es L. vas gamall] add. S. hann vas ok f.] add. S.

[733] 10. dæle-kere] S; kere lítlu, H.

[734] 14. tveim haondom] add. S.

[735] 3. Án, Cd.

[736] 4. es þar bió s.] add. S.

[737] 7. síðan] add. S.

[738] 8. Þorkele, Cd.

[739] 17. ok á miðle] S om, ok.

[740] 20. Skruðey, S.

[741] 21. gegnt Þerno-nese, S.

[742] 4. alla æve] add. S.

[743] 12. þar upp frá] add. S.

[744] 16. lnd, Cd.; -laund, S.

[745] 20. ok oðrum megin, S.

[746] 1. -dale] S.

[747] 8. Berufirðingar, S, H.

[748] 12. land] add. S.

[749] 18. Arnar sonar] S; sonar (.s.), om. Cd. kongs, Cd.

[750] 19. Solga] Fas. ii. 143; Sauga, S; Solva, Cd.

[751] 6 keili Selgs, S.

[752] 10 Kams- (not kambs-), S and H.

[753] 14 tio vettr] eðr lengr, add. S.

[754] 18 Arnar sonar] Arnar, omitting 's.,' Cd.

[755] 20 Norex, Cd.

[756] 7. londen, S.

[757] 20. (Sá) es, add. Cd.

[758] 3. an ... ráða] en h. m. at londum seljask, S.

[759] 16. S; Hann, Cd.

[760] 22. aondoges-] add. S. þannog] add. S (þann veg).

[761] 3. þá hafðe ... -múla] add. S (reading 'Hregg-').

[762] 6. Hrollaugr] S; hann, H.

[763] 7. en fór a. útan] add. S. [M* adds, Ok eige vitjade hann
Rognvallz iarls foðor síns; þvi at hónom var ótitt við stiúp-móðor
sína.]

[764] hónom] gersemar á dey-janda dege ..., M* (sic).

[765] 9. en Kolsk ... hornet] add. S.

[766] 13. [H (and S) add--Hallr á Siðo átte Ióreiðe Þiðranda d.;
þeirra s. Þorsteinn, f. Magnuss, f. Einars, f. Magnuss bps. Annarr
son Hallz var Egill, f. Þorgerðar, m. Jons bps. ens Helga. Þórvarðr
Hallz son var faðer Þórdísar, m. Iórunnar, m. Hallz prestz, f. Gizorar,
f. þeirra Magnuss bps., ok Þorvallz, f. Gizurar iarls. Yngvildr Hallz
d. var m. Þóreyjar, m. Sæmundar prestz ens Fróða. Þorsteinn Hallz son
var faðer Guðríðar, m. Ióreiðar, m. Ara prestz ens Fróða. Þorgerðr
Hallz d. var m. Yngvildar, m. Liótz, sem fyrr er rítað.] All
these passages, from 'Hallz á Síðo ...,' appear to be extraneous
interpolations. Instead of the last, 'sem f. er rítað,' S repeats,
f. Iarn­gerðar, m. Valgerðar, m. Boðvars, m. Guðnyjar, m. Sturlo-sona.

[767] 5, 11. S inverts Ulf and Thorstein.

[768] 9. Þórgeirs-] (!) Þortetts, Cd.

[769] 12. Vest-márr] S and H.

[770] 18. Hrollaugs] Hrolfs, Cd.

[771] 21. hersiss ... Buno] add. S.

[772] 3. S om. this §.

[773] 4. Half | stalit, junction of leaves in John Erlendsson's copy.

[774] 6. Read, Kiðja-klett?

[775] Iaokuls-felle] here come in two continuous vellum leaves.

[776] 3. es fyr es g.] add. S.

[777] 6. S; hans s. vas, vell.

[778] 7. Gísle] add. S.

[779] 15. f. Teitz] add. S.

[780] hloepe] leypi, vell.

[781] 1. S; logmannz, vell.

[782] 7. -horns, S; -rauns, Cd.

[783] 13. Paraks, S.

[784] 4. es hann ... smiðjo] add. S.

[785] 7. þeirra broeðra] add. S.

[786] 8. Eyjar] vell.; mille Kuða fl. ok Eyjar-ár, S.

[787] 12. Cleykis, S.

[788] 14. ok g. þar skála] add. S.

[789] Þar féllo ... Grinda-vík] ok geyrðiz þar ófriðr með þeim ok
víga-far. En um várit efter fóro þeir Molda-Gnúpr vestr í Grinda-vík
... , S.

[790] 17. Þeir vóro ... Leggjalde] add. S.

[791] 1. Biaorn] S; hann, H.

[792] 3. þóttesk iatta því, S. ok tímgaðesk ... at hann] S; hann
gerðiz, H.

[793] 7. til veiðar ok fiskjar, S.

[794] 18. Dofnials] emend., see Bk. V. 9. 10; Dofnaks, vell.

[795] 3. Aur-goðe] add. S.

[796] 4. hét m. kappe, H.

[797] 9. Þeirra baorn ... Ormh.] add. S.

[798] 13. land] lond, S.

[799] 20. eiga] add. S.

[800] 21. Moðolfs syner ... Hróars] add. S.

[801] 8. Onundr] S; Eyvindr, H.

[802] 4. Hróars s. ... Brávelle] add. M*.

[803] 10. skartz-m.] oflate, S.

[804] 17. mart barna] sex sono eða fleiri, S. Vali, S.

[805] 21. logmaðr, S and H.

[806] 1. Þat s. í O.-kyne] add. S.

[807] 4. Vífill, S.

[808] 5. Brandax] Brandz son, S. Þóra] er átte (blank), add. S.

[809] 6. hét enn f.] add. S.

[810] 9. hónom] þeim ollom, S.

[811] 10. This § S adds.

[812] 13. Her ... leiker] S runs:--Her hefjaz upp landnám í
Sunnlendinga fiórðunge, er með mestom blóma er allz Íslannz fyr
lannz-kosta sakar, ok hofðingja þeirra er þar hafa bygt, bæðe lærðer
ok ólærðer.

[813] 6. Þá ... ryke] conject.; þar skylde gera aðra reyke, vell.

[814] 2. f. Þorbiarnar, f. Brandz í Skógom, S, omitting all the
following links.

[815] 4. Skógom] [S. Hann (Þrase) bió Skógom enom eystrom; hann vas
ramm-aukenn miok ok átte deilor við Loðmund enn Gamla, sem áðr es
ritað: Thrase was very strength-eaken (lycanthropic), and had quarrels
with Lodmund the Old, as is written before].

[816] 9. Rauðafelle eno eystra, S.

[817] 15. nú] add. S.

[818] 1. Írar-ár, S.

[819] 5. Raumdæla fylke, S.

[820] 6. fór af þ. til Íslandz, H.

[821] 16. ok] add. S.

[822] 18. Deilda, S.


[**ERROR: Contains unhandled entity &acomb;]
[823] 20. viii m&acomb;, vell.

[824] 1. ok fyr austan, S.

[825] 4. Þuride, S (wrong).

[826] 6. S places this § 7, much abridged, after ch. 7. 3.


[**ERROR: Contains unhandled entity &rcomb;]
[827] 9. Aurge] av&rcomb;ge (r above the line), H; auðge, S.

[828] 14. Nauindæla fylke, S.

[829] 3. Hroerek] Herrek, Cd. (I. E), the last line being sliced off
in the vell.

[830] 5. Efter] here ends the second vell. leaf (see IV. 15. 2).

[831] 9. með ráðe Hængs, S.

[832] 12. þing] fong, S.

[833] 13. Hrafn ... -maðr] es fyrst sagðe log upp á Islande, S.

[834] 15. eystre] ok, add. S.

[835] 2. Otkell, S.

[836] 4. þeirra d. vas Ásný ... Gretter] add. S.

[837] 6. Ásdís] S; Aldis, Cd.

[838] 12. Vétrliðe nídde ... drápo] add. M*.

[839] 16. S; Sveinbiorn, Cd.

[840] 17. [Egils Saga thus records the sons of Hæng:--Stórolfr hét
son Hængs; hann átte Hválenn ok Stórolfs-voll: hans son var Ormr
enn sterke.


Herjolfr hét annarr son Hængs; hann átte land í Fliótz-hlíð til mótz
við Baug, ok út til Hváls loekjar: hann bió under Breckom; hans sonr
hét Sumarliðe, faðer Vetrliða skállz.

Helge var enn þriðe son Hængs; hann bió á Velle, ok átte land til
Rangár et efra ok ofan til mótz við broeðr sína.

Vestarr hét enn fiórðe son Hængs; hann átte land fyr austan Rangá miðle
ok Þver-ár, ok enn neðra hlut Stórolfs-vallar; hann átte Móeiðe dóttor
Hildiss or Hildis-ey; þeirra dótter var Ásný es átte Ófeigr Gretter:
Vestarr bió á Móeiðar-hvále.

Helge Hængs son átte Mobil dóttor Hallgeirs í Hallgeirs-ey. Þeirra
dótter Helga as átte Oddbiorn aska-smiðr, er Oddbiarnar-leið er
við kend.

Hrafn var enn fimte son Hængs; hann var fyrstr laogsogo maðr á Íslande;
hann bió á Hofe eftir foðor sínu. Þórlaug var dótter Hrafns, er átte
Iorundr Goðe; þeirra son var Valgarðr at Hofe. Hrafn vas gofgastr
sona Hængs.]

[841] 5. Íslannz] at fýsn sínne, add. S.

[842] 18. Sigfúss ... Lamba ... Rannveigar ... Þórgerðar] thus
emendated; Sigfus ... Lambe ... Rannveig ... Þorgerðr, S.

[843] 5. reiste, S. lá] sá, Cd. fyr a. Fliót] add. S.

[844] 10. Ulfr ...] Ulfr Orgoðe, es Oddaverjar ero frá komner ok
Sturlungar. Mart stór-menne es frá Iorunde komet á Islande, S.

[845] 2. mótz] móðz, Cd.

[846] 4. Véli-] Vælu-, S.

[847] 8. skoroðo, Cd.; stokoðo, S.

[848] 12. Sniall-Steinn] S; Steinn, Cd. Sniallsteins-hofða, S.

[849] 15. xxx, Cd.

[850] 19. Þeir vóro ... vænleik] add. S.

[851] 2. xxx, Cd.

[852] 3. Onundr fór] add. S.

[853] 13. bett-, Cd. ok varð hann svá sekr] S; ok varð sú sætt, Cd.


[**ERROR: Contains unhandled entity &hstrok;]
[854] 17. Svá fengo þeir fære á Erne at &hstrok; rak, S.

[855] 5. fylgðo h. h. Höfða lond, S.

[856] 6. til h. Sigmunde bað hann] S; en Sigm. fekk, Cd.

[857] 7. ok rézt ... sveit] add. S.

[858] 9. at] á, Cd.

[859] 12. Írsk] kynjoð af Vestr-londom, S.

[860] 17. Here come in 3 continuous vellum leaves.

[861] 1 kveld, S.

[862] 4 þat] þar, S.

[863] 15 Kolle, S.

[864] 16 fyr vestan Rang-aó] add. S.

[865] ok Tr.] S; of Trolla-skog, vell.

[866] 17 at] S; í, vell.

[867] 4. xxx, vell.

[868] 11. Þórnýjar] Þórunnar, S.

[869] 13. Asborg, S.

[870] 14. S; log-mannz, vell.

[871] 17. reka] telja, S.

[872] 2. hans] Hrolfs, S.

[873] 8. Ringja, vell.

[874] 15. honom]?

[875] 18. Láte ... maonnom] omitted by oversight in Corpus Poet. Bor.,
where it should have stood in Bk. vi.

[876] 7. Groenmar, vell.

[877] 19. Tialdar-, vell.

[878] 2. Iorunn] Ior, vell.

[879] 3. Sigfúss] Figfús, vell.

[880] 1. alla] add. S.

[881] 4. f. Þórláks] S; Þorlaks s., H.

[882] 6. iðrom] yðrom, vell.

[883] 7. dóttor Hrolfs Rauðskeggs, S.

[884] 9. Oddnýjar] Asborgar, S.

[885] 12. Brandr son hans] emend, according to M*; Brandr son Áskels,
M*.

[886] 14. S; launan, vell. (here).

[887] 18. Lunans-] H and S (here).

[888] 11. Væt-, S.

[889] 15. logmannz; H and S.

[890] 15. miðle R. ok Þ.] add. S.

[891] 19. móðor-faðer] m. bróðer, vell., but '.f.' above the line.

[892] 5. hónom] Lopte, S.

[893] 7. son] s. (i.e. son), S; 'f.' (i.e. faðer), vell.

[894] 15. sextoegr] S; vi toga, vell.

[895] 17. Salvoro, S.

[896] 6. es] en, Floam. S.

[897] 8. þreytto, S. drógoz at her, S.

[898] 10. Atla-ey] Floam. S.; Atley, H.

[899] 11. saórom] Atle iarl átte efter þriá sono: hét einn Hall­steinn;
hann vas ellztr ok vitraztr þeirra broeðra; þá Hersteinn; þá
Holmsteinn, add. Floam. S., see Bk. I. 3.

[900] 15. þeir k. ... f. dyre-br. á St.] thus M* (AM. 515); þeir kómo
á Stálfioro fyr Stocks-eyre, H, S.

[901] 18. S; Fúla-lækjar, H.

[902] 20. Atle] Olver, S.

[903] 21. bió] kom, vell.

[904] 4. Erro-] S; Orra-, Cd.

[905] 6. Olves-topter, Floam. S.

[906] 15. Hróallz s.] add. S.

[907] 16. S; -loekjar, Cd.

[908] 17. f. Þór., m. Tyrf.] S; om. H.

[909] 20. vóro Vestmenn] add. M*.

[910] 21. keypte, vell.

[911] 4. komner] add. S.

[912] 6. ok bió ... komet] add. S.

[913] 7. Instead of sem fyrr es getið, M* adds--Ion bp enn helge,
ok Þorlákr bp enn fyrre, Ión Lopts son, Are enn Fróðe, Hallr í Hólom.

[914] 10. Risa, H, S.

[915] 12. xv, Floam. S.

[916] 14. Tófo] Ioro-, Floam. S.

[917] 17. at] í, S.

[918] 18. Velv-, vell. here; Vælu-, S.

[919] 21. mál] S; fé sitt, vell.

[920] ungr] S; undr, vell.

[921] 2. -skógs] H, S.

[922] 4. þeim] honom, S.

[923] 5. átta, S.

[924] 6. tveir, S.

[925] 9. Domne] thus; Dofne, S. nio ... vas hann] S; homoiotel. in
vell.

[926] 14. hofet, S.

[927] 16. -skelfis, S.

[928] 18. austr, S.

[929] 20. ok tók þá með londom, S.

[930] 22. Erao-, vell. (here).

[931] 3. Hole for Tve.

[932] 4. ok] til, S.

[933] 5. Hann vas hamr.] S; hole in the vell.

[934] 10. Orra-, vell.

[935] 19. Giz. ... mann] add. S. Giz. son] Ketilbiarnar son, Floam. S.

[936] 1. Mork, S; Msk, Cd. -hvál] -hraun, S.

[937] 2. komner af E.] add. S.

[938] 6. -holma, S.

[939] 19. S; Vnvs, vell.

[940] 1. S; Olafr, vell.

[941] 10. laug-Skapta, S.

[942] 11. faoðor] 'f.' om. vell.

[943] 17. -dax, vell.

[944] 18. Þórkell Trandill] thus, by help of S; ok Þorkels Trandels,
Cd.

[945] 21. S; Bryniolfr, H.

[946] 2. Brond.] Bryniolfr, vell.

[947] 10. Mave Naddoddz s., S; here the last vell. leaf ends.

[948] Lax-á] Laxár, S.

[949] 11. at] S; í, Cd. Sviðo-cára, S.

[950] 19. þau lond, S. Tungan eystre, S (better?).

[951] 2. Ollaugar, Cd.

[952] 10. Svá s. Teitr] add. Sturl. Saga, vii. ch. 12.

[953] 5. Olleif, Cd.

[954] 9. ii, Cd.

[955] 15. Kollz, S.

[956] 12. selde hána í hendr f. s., S.

[957] 17. Olleifs, Cd.

[958] 9. en þeir ... bygt í h. land-n.] add. S.

[959] 18. Þóres... Þingvelle] foðor Þóris er átte Helgu Ións dóttor, S.

[960] 19. Einars] emend.; Arnar. s., Cd.

[961] 7. Ormr] S; Grímr, Cd.

[962] 8. Sínka] Gamla, S. fyrir vestan Varmá til Þver-ár; S.

[963] 12. Eyvindr ... firðe] S; hann var enn á mot H. kge. í
Hafrs-firðe, Cd.

[964] 14. Ulfr and Ezki, Cd.

[965] 7. ritað, Cd.

[966] 13. syner] s., Cd.

[967] 16. Erlingr] Egill, S.

[968] Sigvatz] Sigmundar, S.

[969] 17. Alofu, Cd.

[970] 8. S omits from f. Hafrbiarnar ... Hawk's contemporaries.

[971] 13. ek] om. Cd. (Iohn Erlendsson, the vellum leaf being lost).

[972] 14. alheidit, S.

[973] 3. G; Rannvis s., Cd.

[974] 5. Halfd. ... Hroer. s.] add. G.

[975] 8. Avrgoðe, es] Sturlungar ero frá k. ok Oddaverjar, G.

[976] 10. Fróða] f. Loptz, f. Sæmundar í Odda, add. AM. 464. Loðmundr
Svartz s. var f. Gríms, f. Svertings, f. Vígdísar, m. Sturlo í Hvammi,
add. G.

[977] 11. Heings, thus Cd.

[978] 25. K; Gollings, Cd.; Golldins, G.

[979] 26. Ars, Cd.; asks, G.

[980] 28. Oldusteins, Cd.

[981] 38. Haoscollz] H', Cd.

[982] 43. s. M. ens Sp.] add. G.

[983] 3. Bialfa] Bialka, G.

[984] 4. Þórbranz] Þrondar, G.

[985] 9. Reyðar-vaz múla, fragm.

[986] 28. Gríms s. ... Sogne] add. K.

[987] 30. Ásg. s., Ulfs s.] add. G.

[988] 31. hans] Geirs, G.

[989] 32. í Byscops-t.] add. G.

[990] 40. Einars s.] Add. G.

[991] 2. Olafs halta, Cd.

[992] 5. Heings, Cd. Ld. I. 9. 4 makes no mention of Glum.

[993] 10. ens spaka ... Þiðranda] add. G, 132; om. Cd.

[994] 12. Ióreiðar] G, 132; Þiðranda, Cd.

[995] 16. Þórvarðr] 132; Þorvalldr, Cd.

[996] 19. Krákr, es Sk.... Mikle] 132; Krakr ok Þorgrímr, Cd.

[997] 29. -holma, Cd.

[998] 30. Haeyrar, Cd,

[999] 34. Gríms s.... Sogne] add. G.

[1000] 1. eigi] add. fragm., om. Cd.

[1001] 2. sam-feðri, G, 132.

[1002] 3. tilings, Cd.

[1003] 4. Karfa] 132; Skarpa, Cd.


[**ERROR: Contains unhandled entity &hstrok;]
[1004] 7. 132; Sorle broðer &hstrok;s s. broðer, Cd.

[1005] 17. Ayvallz s., Cd.; miswritten throughout all MSS., but in
various ways--eyvallz, K; aulvallz, 132.

[1006] 33. loðing, Cd.

[1007] 34. hæings, G.

[1008] 3 Bera] G; Horn, 132, 466.

[1009] 2 móðer Iór ... Helga] add. 132, G, K.

[1010] 4 Einars, f.] 132; om. Cd.

[1011] 9 Hál.] Helga (Hoelga), G.

[1012] 12 at] add. 132.

[1013] 16 Þórðar] Skíða, Cd. Þórgerðr ... vas] om. Cd.

[1014] 19 Fliótverjar, K; Stur­lungar ok Þórvarðr Þórarens son ok
..., 132.

[1015] 23 Orðig-skeggja, G, K.

[1016] 31 Ketils s. Br.] G, 132; Brimils sonar, Cd.

[1017] 36 Olafs, Cd.

[1018] 1. Haosk', Cd.

[1019] 10. Are] read Sæmundr?

[1020] 13. rauða, Cd.

[1021] 20. Skinna ... -Skeggja s.] add. 132, G.

[1022] 22. Mass, Cd.

[1023] 34. Knattar-s.] fragm.; Snartar-s., Cd.; Svartar, W.

[1024] 39. syne ... Yrar s.] add. fragm.

[1025] 41. f. Sturlo] add. fragm.

[1026] 5. Oxna-Þ.] W; þvi var h. svá, k. Cd.

[1027] 6. Hákone] thus 132, W, fragm.

[1028] 8. norðan] fragm.; sunnan, 132, W.

[1029] 9. Þórolfs, fragm.

[1030] 10. ens] add. W.

[1031] 43. Þoriðr, Cd.

[1032] 4. Márs] Olafs, Cd.

[1033] 15. Links must be missing here.

[1034] 16. Ulbeiðe, 132.

[1035] 5. Fimte ... er átte Teitr] emendated, Dótter Hallz var Groa
er átte Teitr son Gizorar Hvíta, þeirra son var Hallr, etc., Cd.

[1036] 11. f. Ioans] om. Cd. The clause in brackets is a repetition
from above.

[1037] 12. Þorvaldz, Cd.

[1038] 15. átte] átte síðan, Cd.

[1039] 18. herser einn ágætr] Cd.

[1040] 1. Yngvolde, B.

[1041] 4. Iamta-lande] (sic!).

[1042] 10. í] add. B.

[1043] 16. þó] add. B.

[1044] 18. sín aoll] add. B.

[1045] 22. þá es vóro] add. B.

[1046] 1. aftr] add. B.

[1047] 3. þat ... konungs] B; at hann dræge Haralde kge ríki, Cd.

[1048] 15. í] B; um, Cd.

[1049] 19. fylkna, B.

[1050] 21. yrðe] B; være, Cd.

[1051] 3. á haf at sigla, B.

[1052] 5. B; Hrólfr, A.

[1053] 8. af konungs hende] add. B.

[1054] 9. Hrólfr, A.

[1055] 10. hof er helgat var Þór, ok var enn meste ástvin hans, B.

[1056] 13. eyinne, Cd.

[1057] 19. boð. hann] boð. honom, B. B; fara útlagan, Cd.

[1058] 21. ok ... miðlom] B; ok legge allt sitt mál á hans vald, Cd.

[1059] 2. Íslande] B; landeno, Cd.

[1060] 16. annarre] A, B; annan enda, B* (AM. 446).

[1061] 20. Sniófellz-, Cd.

[1062] 2. Þórsvág, B.

[1063] 3. B; nese, Cd.

[1064] 12. í miðjo neseno, B.

[1065] 15. B; at þat m. þ. fara þá er hann doee ok aller á neseno
hans frændr, Cd.

[1066] 17. þar ... komet] B; sem Þórr hafðe á l. k. a tanganom
nessens, A.

[1067] 2. read eggjom?

[1068] 10. aoll s.] add. B.

[1069] 15. auðlaz, Cd.; aulydaz, B.

[1070] 20. Biaorn] B; om. A. utan, B (badly).

[1071] 4. aoll Dalalond, B.

[1072] 11. Thus A, B; Langa-dals ár, Landn.

[1073] 16. I.e. Orkn-hvala-; Hvala-f., B; Uthvala-f., M.

[1074] 8. B; Unnr, Cd.

[1075] 15. homoiotel. in B, 'kall, Þorst.'

[1076] 21. B; -kvende, Cd.

[1077] 29. ok er hann lenge við þessa sogo, ok sialdan við gott kendr,
sem síðarr mun sagt verða, add. B (309).

[1078] 2. á Vaz-halse inn frá brecku frá Drápuhlíð, B.

[1079] 22. B; ok þat at þeir mundi ganga þar oe. sínna sem a. á
mannf. á grase, A.

[1080] 5. Cengr] add. B.

[1081] 6. son hans] ok ss. hans, B.

[1082] 14. en harðasta atlaga, B.

[1083] 3. Skóg-str.] emend.; Þórsnesingar, A, B.

[1084] 10. B; stórlangt, Cd.

[1085] 12. B; homoiotel. in A, en Ceall. Þ. skilde þat til.

[1086] 6. þat fr. fr.] B; eitt friðbrot verit hafa, Cd.

[1087] 13. Her með g. Þórðr dóttor sína Þórgríme (!), B.

[1088] 16. þingit þar sem næstum var sett, ok stendr þar enn, B.

[1089] 18. um a. Vestf.], or ollom Vestfirðinga fiórðunge, B.

[1090] 19. skulu menn þar á þinginn setja domhring (!), B.

[1091] 2. þar á gr. s. v.] add. B.

[1092] 8. hofstaðr, Cd.; hofuð-bær, B.

[1093] 9. nær því] om. B.

[1094] veret] here one leaf is missing in B (309).

[1095] MS. on which Thunder had his seat.

[1096] 7. h; taca þionosto, Cd.

[1097] 8. onnor hríð, h. á þing] til Alþingis, h.

[1098] 9. ok drap ... land] add. h.

[1099] 13. Blank.

[1100] 20. hann kosenn, Cd.

[1101] 5. Snorre] Þorðr, Cd.

[1102] 8. Blank, read af Englande?

[1103] 13. Here John Erlendsson ends.

[1104] 20. drepner, Cd.

[1105] 3. En þann, Cd.

[1106] 4. -dauði, Cd.

[1107] 6. Hring-dolom, Cd.

[1108] 8. Ofeigs, 104.

[1109] 11. hverr er, Cd.

[1110] 12. hulin, Cd.

[1111] Arne Magnusson annotates--'This copy I acquired from Thord
Johnson, but he had cut it out from a book belonging to Thorbiorg
Vigfus' daughter, his aunt (father's sister). It is the most accurate
of all I have seen; none better is now I think left, since the vellum
is lost. I call it "Cod. A."'

[1112] Of Cod. B he says--'It was formerly owned by Sir Torfe Johnsson
of Boe, who, no doubt, had got it after the late Mag. Bryniolf. I
got it from Thorlac, Bishop Thord's son; it had been at the head of a
big volume which I cut up, separating the single treatises. I call it
"Cod. B" or "Baiensem" or "secundum."'

[1113] It is curious that the colophon is attached to Cod. B, not A. It
is the only instance I know of, of a colophon to John Erlendsson's
many transcripts. One supposes that he meant this copy for himself,
the other for the bishop. Note that he spells his own name with two
ll's, not rl.

[1114] aðile = hofðinge = Lat. princeps, set me first thinking.

[1115] The oldest copies of Annals (Royal Libr., Sturl. ii. 348
sqq.) denote the Law-speaker by a Latinized form, 'legifer.' Who
coined that word?

[1116] 'Svá setto þeir Þorlacr byscop oc Cetill byscop, at ráðe
Autzorar erki-byscops oc Sæmundar [prestz ((prestz] add. AM. 135,
4to.)) ] oc margra kenni manna annarra, Cristinna laga þótt sem nu vas
tínt oc upp sagt.' The text of the colophon, still extant in eight
vellums, is given in Finsen Ia. 36; II. 45; III. 41, 133, 147, 182,
222, 266, 291.

The enactment of the Tithe Law (Libell. 10. 3) was effected by bishop
Gizor (there was yet no bishop of Holar), Sæ-mund, and Mark the
law-speaker. The Tithe Law, though older in date, is in all MSS. but
one appended to the Christian Law.

There are nine MSS. of the Christian Law Section; one is defective
at the end, and the colophon missing; in six the colophon observes
the order, 'Bishop Ketil and Bishop Thorlac.' Codex Regius itself
reads this way. The other two MSS., Stadaholensis and its companion
AM. 181 chart, observe the order given above, 'Bishop Thorlac and
Bishop Ketil.' The reason for this we take to be that the bulk of our
copies belong to the northern diocese, Codex Regius among them, while
the southern, western, and eastern copies of the Scalholt diocese would
read like Stadaholensis, and give the precedence to their own bishop,
whom also Are puts first, living in the west as he did in Thorlac's
see. So in the dedication pedigree, the two pair of bishops, the two
departed ones, and then the two living ones, are each given in the
same order, Scalholt first, then Holar. The precedence undoubtedly
in law belonged to Scalholt as the older diocese and mother-see
as it were. We have more copies from the North, because the strict
observance of the old law lasted till late in the 14th century in
the northern see; hence all our 14th-century copies are northern.

[1117] 4. Attar-, Cd.

[1118] 8. vetra] om. Cd.

[1119] 8. hofs] emend.; hofa A, original possibly read hofs á þinge.

[1120] 5. vetrum, Cd.

[1121] 8. sumor] om. Cd. -firþer, Cd.

[1122] 1. þagse verða] emend.; þegn varþ, Cd.; þegja, A* (1812).

[1123] 11. ár] 'at' or 'ar,' Cd., but 'ár' is meant.

[1124] 4. Alfs] Olfs, Cd. Gellis] Einn maðr fell af Odde en iii urðo
miok sárer, add. A* (Wh.).

[1125] 5. Alþingis] en þinget vas þá under Ármannz-felle, an aside,
add. A* (Wh.).

[1126] 6. vi] add. A* (Wh.).

[1127] 9. at reka] add. A* (Wh.).

[1128] 18. dóm-nefna] á alþinge, add. A* (Wh.).

[1129] 19. aoðrom] Af því skal einn maðr þaðan sitja fyrer forraðs
goðorð, add. A* (Wh.), corrupt; read--af því ero forn goðorð
Norðlendinga fiórðunge skerð, a kind of homoiotel. from 'fiórðunge,'
cp. Logretto Þáttr.

[1130] 21. Saxn. at c.] add. A* (OM).

[1131] 1. Baoðvars sonar ... hann] add. A* (OM).

[1132] 6. En Þangbr ... vetrenn] add. A* (OM).

[1133] 11. cristnen] cristni en, Cd.

[1134] 16. þat] þar, Cd.

[1135] 6. ...] eige, Cd. (wrongly); Spare-ek eige, Niala.

[1136] 7. Æ man ... Froeyja] add. A* (OM).

[1137] 9. þings] þingvallar, A* (OM).

[1138] 16. stórom nær] emend.; stor-ner, A* (K); svá nær, Cd.

[1139] áðr viner ... miðle] thus emend.; at of sa a miþli, Cd.

[1140] 6. halfre m. s.] add. A* (OM).

[1141] 18. hvárs-tveggja] add. A* (OM).

[1142] 21. héllt] helzt, A* (OM).

[1143] 23. oc miðlomc svá mál við, A* (OM). hvárer], hverer-, Cd.

[1144] 2. es] read ef?

[1145] 21. Halfþanar, Cd.

[1146] 6. Þórvalldr] A* (S); Þorvallz, Cd.

[1147] 18. þeim] read hans?

[1148] 21. nonus] emend., according to A* (S); septimus, Cd.

[1149] 1. Petrs, Cd.

[1150] 9. á enom x] tio vetrom, A* (S).

[1151] Ísleifs] om. A; add. A* (S); a little blank space left in Cd.

[1152] 13. þat ... rétt] thus A* (S); en þa vas namn hans rett, Cd.

[1153] 2. vitam, Cd.

[1154] 3. prestz] add. A* (S).

[1155] 4. oc fl. sp. m.] add. A* (S).

[1156] 5. á lande ... numner] add. A* (S).

[1157] 8. iartecner (= iarteGner), Cd.

[1158] 9. svar-þogom, Cd.

[1159] 16. -ævom, here.

[1160] 5. hramfns, Cd. sumor] add. A* (S).

[1161] 6. [8. b.] interpolated? for the following runs on Bergþor; A*
(SK) om.

[1162] 13. halda] haldaz, A* (K).

[1163] 15. oc sagt ... epter] oc leset upp um sumaret efter í Logretto,
A* (S).

[1164] 8. half-sextoegr] emend., according to A* (S), þá vas hann
fiórom vetrom meirr an fimtogr; half-fertogr, Cd.

[1165] 12. nóttom] thus, not genit., Cd.

[1166] 13. v] add. A* (K); om. Cd.

[1167] 16. Hierl'm., Cd.

[1168] Svia] Fracka k'r, A* (S).

[1169] 21. cxx] hundrad ok attian, A* (S).

[1170] 22. en tvau ... Íslannz] add. A* (S), homoiotel.; þá hafðe
Ísland veret bygt cc vetra tolf röð, annat í heiðne en annat i Cristne,
A* (K).

[1171] 6. lyxc, Cd.

[1172] 1. Goðmundar with a  above the line.

[1173] 18. Thus (f., i.e. foðor), Cd.

[1174] 9. hlaut-blóð] emend.; hlaut, Cd.

[1175] 1. heygðer] thus Kringla.

[1176] 8. báðom hliðveggjom, B.

[1177] 17. Read, hlaut-teinar?

[1178] 19. hlaut-blóð] emend.; hlaut, Cd.

[1179] 21. Spurious.

[1180] 12. rioðru nautz bloðs, Cd.

[1181] 17. r. e. Óss, Cd.

[1182] 18. vætte] vitni, Cd.

[1183] doema] om. Cd.

[1184] 19. logmæt, Cd.

[1185] 15. hann vinnr, Cd.

[1186] 17. Thus Cd.

[1187] 22. halda] S; selja, R.

[1188] 13. haldasc?

[1189] 12. Þær] H; þat, Cd.

[1190] 19. elldar u. brenna, H.

[1191] 2. blica, Cd.

[1192] 11. gyma, H.

[1193] 19. mætar ... megen-tr.] add. H.

[1194] 2. hvar sem, Cd.

[1195] 7. Svá sem vin sínn á vatne fiune | eða bróðor sínn á braut
hitte, add. G.

[1196] 13. greme Goðs] H; reiðe, Cd.

[1197] 22. gapande, gínande, Cd.

[1198] 2. er] read 'en.'

[1199] 10. blóte] emend.; blóðe, Cd.; read, ráða oss í goða-blóte?

[1200] 13. mis-iamt or úiamt] emend.; saman, Cd.

[1201] 1. Síðan vas fr. bl. þat] emend.; með þ. form, sem síðan es
efter hafðr í blóte því, at call, es t., etc., Cd.

[1202] 4. strenger iiij, Cd.

[1203] 9. es scorat] om. Cd.

[1204] 9. fimmtogr, so also Cod. Arna-Magn.; read sex-togr.

[1205] 11. þó at þeir menn ...] thus Cd.; Cod. Arna-Magn. has nothing
answering to clause 2.

[1206] 5. síðan upp es, Cd.

[1207] 21. hefla segl], emend.; half segl, Cd.


[**ERROR: Contains unhandled entity &rcomb;]
[1208] 7. herm&rcomb;, Cd.

[1209] 13. eða] read, at.

[1210] 12. vsð, Cd.

[1211] 15. var, Cd.

[1212] 3. es þá vas ... Ísland] H; es allz h. g. var á Islande, M.

[1213] 9. guðar, Cd.

[1214] 9. Ok annan dag efter í Lögrétto vas þat í lög sett, at af
skylde taka holm-göngor allar þaðan í frá: ok vas þat goert at ráðe
allra (enna) vitrosto manna es við vóro stadder. En þar vóro aller
þeir es vitraster vóro á landeno. Ok þesse hefer holm-ganga síðast
framið ((framin, Cd.))  veret á Íslande es þeir Hrafn ok Gunnlaugr
börðosc.--Gunnl. Saga, A. B. And the next day after it was made law
in the Court of Laws that henceforth wagers of battle should be done
away with, and this was done by the council of all the wisest men that
were present, and all the wisest men of the land were there. And this
wager of battle that Raven and Gun-laug fought was the last that hath
ever been in Iceland.

[1215] Biskups Ogmundar búð (bp. of Scalholt 1522-40) vestan til
við Þingvalla-traðer, á hoegre hond á túninu þá heim að kirkjunni
er riðið.--Catastasis.

[1216] Cp. the old Frostathing-law:--'But the priest that is to read
over the book, he shall ring the big bell whenever he wants to go to
the Moot; which bell must not be used on any other occasion during
the session.'

[1217] 18. því] þ'ri, Cd.

[1218] 4. muno?

[1219] 16. Read, oervite.

[1220] 13. enge] félag, Cd.; but since underlined.

[1221] 23. einn] add. by conj.

[1222] 1. spyrja her, Cd.

[1223] enda] enn, Cd.

[1224] 2. eðr] aðr, Cd.

[1225] 5. The rest of this clause is missing.

[1226] 14. iij, Cd., read tva?

[1227] 20. tylftar-] xii, Cd.

[1228] 4. xii.

[1229] 21. ondverz, Cd.

[1230] 10. at] superabundant.

[1231] 6. ganga, Cd.

[1232] 3. Ef sá maðr ... saocenne] we have moved up to clauses.

[1233] One for each Quarter-court, probably.

[1234] 7. leita] líta, 132.

[1235] 7. hætto-mikit, 464.


[**ERROR: Contains unhandled entity &mnmacr;]
[1236] 13. mein] emend.; 'mn' or '&mnmacr;,' Cdd.

[1237] 7. eyddesk] thus also fragm. 162.

[1238] ok svá varner] om. Cd.

[1239] 12. þ'te, Cd.; þótti, fragm.

[1240] 17. skolldim, Cd.

[1241] 2. enn fimtar dóm, fragm.; fimtar dóm, Cd.

[1242] 3. See note a.

[1243] 4. See note b.

[1244] 5. See note c.

[1245] 11. á Hvíta-nese] om. Cd.

[1246] 1. Fragm. here reads--Scalltu Scapte | s. N. (sic) nefna fimtar
dóminn er f' forn goð | orð er nefndr fiórðungs dómr, fsrnar | fsrnar
[thus bis] tylfter í fiórðunge hverjum. Sia mon | ek ok rað til þess
s. N. at taka upp ný | etc. fyrer] f' for', Cd.

[1247] 2. þrennar] ok þrennar, fragm.

[1248] 3. at t. upp] taka upp, fragm.

[1249] 9. ok inni-h. ... sk.-manna] om. Cd.

[1250] 10. ij] ok skal fylgja hverjum eiði, er þat skal á leggja
... , Cd.

[1251] 14. nefnder (sic), Cd.

[1252] 18. lovom, Cd.

[1253] 23. log] lof, fragm.

[1254] I mark that this has been noticed once, and only once, before,
viz. by M. Jörgensen, of Copenhagen, in his History of the Ancient
Church of Denmark, p. 378, a work full of sagacity and genuine
first-hand learning.

[1255] The passage (from Styrme's book?) is only found in Hawk's-book,
'breið' miswritten for 'borg.' There is no space for a Broad-frith
writer, where all is uniform, and points to Are as the sole chronicler;
while Borg-frith contains chequered details, and Brand was, as we see,
a native of that county.

[1256] 16. c] om. Cd.

[1257] 1. Þórvarðr] om. Cd.

[1258] 5. Hoelga-fialle, Cd.

[1259] 7. En suðr] om. Cd.


[**ERROR: Contains unhandled entity &acomb;]
[1260] 22. xiii m&acomb;, Cd.

[1261] 5. skíraz] skíra sik, Cd.

[1262] 15. Hauka-gile] Gilja, Cd.

[1263] 5. dótter Þórðar frá Haofða] add. B* (O).

[1264] 21. frá] sva, Cd.

[1265] 22. Skofta s.] add. B* (O).

[1266] 5. þá er ort haofðo kvæðet] add. B* (O).

[1267] 6. § 5 is taken from B* (O), which is here fuller and
better. Biscop spurðe hví hann væge þá. 'Þvi at þeir sogðo ockr eiga
born saman.' Byscop svarar: 'Þeir lugo á ockr, en þú foerðer ó-orð
þeirra afleiðis, þvi at ek mátta vel bera born þín efter mer.' Cd.:
The bishop asked him why he slew them. 'Because they said we have
children together.' The bishop answered: 'They lied about us, but
thou hast turned their wickedness in a wrong way, for I might well
bear thy children after me.'

[1268] 2. Þá m. byscop ... vargar] add. B* (O).

[1269] 6. eftir Alþ.] B* (O); epter á Alþ., Cd.

[1270] 14. Emend.; bioggo þeir Þ. þann enn fiórða vetr at Loekjam., B*
(O); þeir b. þar v vetr síðan, Cd.

[1271] 21. Nockoro] here come in four continuous vellum leaves,
see Landn., p. 227, n. 10.

[1272] 7. bratiz, Cd.

[1273] 10. um þá] thus Cd.

[1274] 20. Small hole in vell.

[1275] 3. skolo þer, Cd.

[1276] 7. þokknadiz, Cd.

[1277] 14. B* (N):--Um váret efter fór Þangbrandr at boða Cristne
ok Hallr með hónom: en es þeir kómo vestr um Lóns-heiðe, til
Stafa-fellz--þar bió Þórkell; hann mælte mest í móte trúnne, ok scoraðe
Þangbrand á holm; þá bar Þangbrandr róðo-cross fyrer skiöldenn, ok lauk
svá með þeim at Þangbrandr hafðe sigr ok drap Þórkel:--In the spring
after Thangbrand went forth to preach Christendom, and Hall with him;
but when they came west over Lon's-heath to Staff-fell, there dwelt
Thorkell. He spake most against the faith, and challenged Thangbrand
to wager of battle. Thangbrand bore a red cross on his shield there,
and it ended so with them that Thangbrand had the victory and slew
Thorkell. (Apocryphal probably and of the Niala Editor's making.)

[1278] 17. Þórsteins s.] add. B* (O), Landn.; om. Cd.

[1279] 10. ok í norðr-sveitom Eyfirðinga-fiórdungs, B* (O).

[1280] 11. Kom hann ... heiter síðan] B* (O); hann skírðe marga menn
í Þangbranz-loek í Axarfirðe, Cd.

[1281] 19. Vík] Eyvík, B* (O).

[1282] 5. þeir spurðu, Cd.

[1283] 7. Guðleigi, Cd.

[1284] 2. Hitr-ness, vell.

[1285] 22. Þar um orte St. m. Skald-Refs þetta, and the verse, Cd.

[1286] 2. B* (O) omits all chapter 5, and has instead of it--En
er Þangbrandr var skamt í haf kominn, þá logðoz á mót-viðri með
stormom, ok varð hann aftr-reka til Íslanz. Tók hann land i Höfn í
Borgar-firðe skamt frá Hvítá. Þá bió í Skálholte Gizorr Hvíte, Teitz
son, Ketilbiarnar sonar, en er hann spurðe at Þangbrandr var orðinn
aptr-reka, þá bauð hann hónom til sin ok var Þangbrandr í Skálholte um
vetrinn. Á þeim vetre tók stormr skip Þangbranz ok braut nockot. Um
þat orte Steinunn m. Skald-Refs. Þórr brá ... Ok enn kvað hon--Braut
fyrir ... Þat skip lét Þangbrandr bæta ok kallaðe Iárn-meis--þar er við
kendr Iárn-meis-hofðe.--Follows the journey to Bard-strand. Efter þat
fór Þangbrandr til skips síns, ok fór útan um sumaret á Iárn-meisnom;
ok tókz sú ferð vel; kom af hafe útan at Þróndheime ok lagðe skipe
síno inn til Níðar-óss.

[1287] 3. noren, vell.

[1288] 7. Æ man ...] (2nd line) add. B* (O and N); om. Cd.

[1289] 10. dómenom] thus vell, and B* (O).

[1290] 11. lét verja víge brúar-sporðana, B* (O).

[1291] 12. -sporðana] B* (O); -skorðana, vell.

[1292] 22. lupu, vell.

[1293] 1. sent, Cd.

[1294] 3. syknan] B* (O); þignan, vell. (= þig(syk)nan).

[1295] 14. kom, Cd.

[1296] 21. kviran, thus vell., a Norwayism.

[1297] 18. þer, vell. minni, vell.

[1298] 1. iann, vell.

[1299] 2. þverso, Cd.

[1300] 4. sagðe, vell.

[1301] 13. it] þit, vell.

[1302] 20. þvi] om. vell.

[1303] 22. moðz, vell.

[1304] 7. G. ok H.] thus here, Cd.

[1305] 13. um þat] B* (O) here inserts episode on Sverting, from
Laxdæla or some other extraneous relation: Svertingr bió þá skip sítt
... fór Svertingr hverge at sinne.

[1306] 18. Giz. ok H., Cd.

[1307] 4. hoeggva] öxa, B* (O).

[1308] 7. Thus (en er þeir Gizor ... sand) B* (O); þeir vóro tvær
nætr í Eyjonom áðr þeir fóro inn á land: They were two nights in the
isles before they went into the mainland.--Cd.

[1309] 12. Ásgautz] B*; Iokurs, Cd. (John Erlendsson).

[1310] 3. storn', vell.

[1311] 6. upp frá] hiá, B* (O).

[1312] 8. Skarðenu, vell.; ok báro fyrer ser tvá crossa mikla þá ena
somo sem nú ero í Skarðe eno ytra, B* (O).

[1313] 9. Eystra] ýtra, B* (O).

[1314] 19. á þinget] add. B* (O).

[1315] 1. Um hvat ... ver á] Hverjo voro goðin reið þá her brann
iorðin er nú stondum ver, B* (O) (less good).

[1316] 11. Hallr, G. oc Hialte, B* (O).

[1317] 7. hann vas ... bróðer] emend, according to Vápnfird. Saga
and Ld. IV. 5. 3; Reyðar f. brodi Þórarens s. or seyðar f., vell.

[1318] 14. Olleifs, Cd.

[1319] 19. á fárra vetra freste vas þesse heiðne af numen með allra
hofðingja ráðe, ok alþýðo samþycke, B* (O).

[1320] 4. goðanom ... salteno, Cd.

[1321] 7. Here ends the narrative in B* (O).

[1322] 16. Dnepr] emend.; Nepr, vell.

[1323] 17. skampt, vell.

[1324] 18. Ioh's, vell.

[1325] 2. at Dnapre í] emend.; í drafni at, vell. (i. e. drapne),
by way of metathesis. See p. 412 n.

[1326] 15. Blank left for the name in the vellum.

[1327] 20. l., vell.

[1328] 3. Ion Omundar, vell.

[1329] 11. seftimus, vell.

[1330] 18. Logsogo-mannz, ok] here ends the last vell. leaf. vas þat]
at þat var, Cd.

[1331] 33. Gunnarr] Markus, Cd.

[1332] 34. Cd. here omits: þá tók logsogo Bergþórr Hrafn son.

[1333] 41. Ion, Cd.

[1334] 3. suðr (i. e. in Scalholt diocese) added.

[1335] 7. norðr (i. e. Holar diocese).

[1336] 12. xxx, vi, and xxx, Cd.

[1337] 14. Grikja, Cd.

[1338] 16. Emend.; tí-roeð, Cd.

[1339] 26. Odda] Oddz, Cd. Gils son] thus Biorn o' Skarðsa; Egils
s., Cd.

[1340] Dropn] thus AM. 54; dravfn, AM. 61; read 'rock on the banks
of a river called Dropn (= metathesis for Dnopr, i.e. Dnieper).' The
Flatey-book and AM. 61 abridge and omit the clause.

[1341] biartare, emend.; betre, Cd.

[1342] 2. Emend.; ovitrum, Cd.

[1343] 3. miklu meirr, Cd.

[1344] 15. ungom monnom hverneg framast hverneg eðr m. hv. hætti.

[1345] 2. es] en, Cd.

[1346] 5. spónar, Cd.

[1347] 6. telgt] emend.; til goert, Cd. (til gst).

[1348] 8. anyta, Cd.

[1349] 13. ritaðr, Cd.

[1350] 14. hvalki es] om. Cd.

[1351] 17. ef] es, Cd.

[1352] 19. af] add. by conj.

[1353] 21. spónsens, Cd. (here).

[1354] 1. mer þar annt um vesa] emend.; ek þaðan at um vera, Cd.

[1355] 10. at] á, Cd.

[1356] 16. Gaut. l., Cd.

[1357] 17. Sk. son] at Nupe í Eystra-hrepp (sic), add. AM. 110.

[1358] 10. fyrre, Cd.

[1359] 14. Groenal.] AM. 110.

[1360] 17. AM. 110; Bremen, Cd.

[1361] 20. langæðust, Cd.

[1362] 23. xiiij] emend.; iiij, Cd.

[1363] 8. osiðu Cd.

[1364] 10. þau] þu, Cd.

[1365] 2. Ion, Cd.

[1366] 5. á Alþ.] AM. 110; um alþ., Cd.

[1367] foera] emend.; fara, Cd.

[1368] 6. iij] emend.; iiij, Cd.

[1369] 2. Saxlenzke, Cd.

[1370] 6. á] at, B.

[1371] brúar] B; brúr, Cd.

[1372] 7. sannar iart.] emend.; sanna tign, Cd.

[1373] 1. ....] something is missing here.

[1374] 11. forvitr, Cd.

[1375] 16. um] við, Cd.

[1376] 1. á kveðet] aformat, Cd.

[1377] 8. iataðe, Cd. (here and oftener).

[1378] 13. Lienarðo, Cd.

[1379] 1. ok] read at?

[1380] 10. Petre, Cd.

[1381] 17. forvitra, Cd.

[1382] 20. tiundaðe] -uðo, Cd.

[1383] 23. menn] þeir, Cd.

[1384] 4. auðraða, Cd.

[1385] 13. ok gefa ... síns] added by help of Libellus 10. 5.

[1386] 14. vaón at ... ván vesa] somehow wrong.

[1387] 8. rétte] or reis.

[1388] 17. allt at kné inn at beine, some, 378, 205.

[1389] 3. Emend.; viðr-kenningo, Cd.

[1390] 6. alla hlute, Cd.

[1391] 20. guðs goðgift, Cd.; góð, repetition of God?

[1392] 1. Libell.; Grikkja, Cd.

[1393] 4. at] á, Cd.

[1394] 5. loft upp, Cd.

[1395] 7. dauðer] om. Cd.

[1396] 12. driupa, Cd.

[1397] 14. bende til ættar] emend.; til ætlan, Cd.; or til aldr-tíla?

[1398] 17. -dauði, Cd.

[1399] 21. son, Cd.

[1400] 27. Vilh. tv. E. kononga] emend.; andlát Vilhialms Engla ka
(archetype, andlát Vilh. ii. Engla ka), Cd. and AM. 110.

[1401] 8. Þórleiks] Þorlaks, Cd.

[1402] 13. bóknæmis-m.] emend.; bæna hallds maðr, Cd. and AM. 110.

[1403] 20. es sá] en sá, Cd.

[1404] 21. hónom] hann (trm for tr), Cd.

[1405] 4. vas þá] vas þar?

[1406] 7. hafðe] hefðe, Cd.

[1407] 20. daga?

[1408] 9. efter] thus AM. 205; fyrer, Cd.

[1409] 12. ritaðr, Cd.

[1410] 23. or Boðolfs son.

[1411] 6. læknaðe] or ræktaðe, 378.

[1412] 8. kall.] balldr, Cd.

[1413] 11. Iól] emend.; þat, Cd.

[1414] 17. an áðr] áðr en, Cd.

[1415] 18. Here a sentence must be missing.

[1416] 22. Brygittar, Cd.

[1417] 4. enn] þann, Cd.

[1418] 6. Cearleifs] read Karlsefnis, or Kiarvals, Kiarlaks?

[1419] 15. at] á, Cd.

[1420] 19. Þór. Sím. s.] emend., see Ann. Reg. s. a. 1128; Þorarens
Einars s., Cd.

[1421] 5. Svertings s.] om. Cd.

[1422] 8. unnat, Cd.

[1423] 17. hvarge es] hvar sem, Cd.

[1424] 21. Blondo-óse, Cd.

[1425] 8. Emend.; innlendr, Cd.

[1426] 4. þeirra vas í] er þorf var þ. í mille, 378.

[1427] 14. haokull ... goerr] emend.; haukr sa er á giorðr, Cd. (379);
hauks nautr var er giorðr, 205. Skarm.] 379, AM. 110.

[1428] 18. -tungor, Cd.

[1429] 2. þá] read þar.

[1430] 3. slíks] slík, Cd.

[1431] 4. atfaong] ol á fong, Cd.

[1432] 6. nattverð, Cd.

[1433] 12. koerenn] vígðr, Cd.

[1434] 14. efter] fyrer, AM. 110.

[1435] 19. barsc] brast, Cd. and AM. 110. at] á, Cd. 110.

[1436] 1. Somehow wrong.

[1437] 2. bráðan] emend.; bæðe, Cd.

[1438] 5. sýn laugar-píning] laung sin pining, Cd.

[1439] 6. tveir menn ok lxx] Annals and Obituary, see Sturl. ii. 358,
395; ii and lxxx, Cd.

[1440] 15. þegar] strax, Cd. (l)

[1441] kómo] kom, Cd.

[1442] 19. vætr] emend.; verit, Cd.

[1443] 10. Emend.; ok Ulfheðins, Cd.

[1444] 11. Englands k., Cd.

[1445] 15. Here a whole clause must needs be left out--telling how
he went to Rome and back again, and through what countries.

[1446] ofallt] alls staðar, Cd.

[1447] 6. kosenn, Cd.

[1448] 15. smíð] smíði, Cd.

[1449] 1. ...] something is missing here.

[1450] 2. meðan] med (meþ), Cd.

[1451] 14. oer-grynne] ogrynne, Cd.

[1452] 15. hlut skorta] skort a, Cd.

[1453] 1. varð] var, Cd.

[1454] 3. ef hann ...] this whole clause is corrupt; ef hann var at
sottr til ásiár at hann var bæðe h. mikell saker vizko ok m., etc.

[1455] 18. Petre, Cd.

[1456] 22. dagverð, Cd.

[1457] 2. reynesc] emend.; reyndisk, Cd.

[1458] 5. dagverð, Cd.

[1459] 9. Kl. bp. lét prýða] filled in by conj.; something is missing.

[1460] 14. Meinlátsamr, Cd.

[1461] 2. at] á, Cd.

[1462] 7. tóko] tók, Cd.

[1463] 11. Emend.; landz fiol-sk. (i. e. landz for land z), Cd.

[1464] 17. kosenn, Cd.

[1465] 1. kosenn, Cd.

[1466] 10. Askele, Cd.

[1467] 11. siau] ii, Cd. (= vii).

[1468] 12. þrimr] iij, Cd.

[1469] 13. eige] om. Cd. and AM. 110.

[1470] 18. allz-kostar] allz konar, Cd.

[1471] 19. reyndesk, Cd.

[1472] 4. á] i, Cd.

[1473] 7. Sigurðs son, Cd.

[1474] 8. ábáte] á báre, Cd.

[1475] 16. samin, Cd.

[1476] 17. fróðleiks] emend.; frásaguar, Cd.

[1477] ritnar] ritaðar, Cd.

[1478] 4. groett] B; gert, Cd.

[1479] 11. emnt] B; ent, Cd.

[1480] 15. fiolskyldor miklar, B.

[1481] 21. lið] B; born, Cd.

[1482] 2. orð um] þat, add. Cd.

[1483] 12. at fyrer-boðe] A, B, = fyrra bragðe?

[1484] 12. es leið] add. B.

[1485] 1. aldrege of-hent] B; afhent, Cd.; cp. mod. mér er þat um hönd.

[1486] 9. farsæligt] B; þarfsælegt, Cd.

[1487] 9. til gefeð] thus; om. B.

[1488] 13. at heims-v.] add. fragm. 383.

[1489] 19. foere] (subj.), B; fór, Cd.

[1490] 1. vas] add. B.

[1491] 4. tók] iók, B.

[1492] 19. vj] A, B.

[1493] 1. en báru þó, Cd.

[1494] 13. dýrke þeir] dýrke þér, A, B.

[1495] 16. lesa] B; hafa, Cd.

[1496] 1. mis-sét] missýne, B.

[1497] 3. ok Þykkva-boer heiter] om. A, B, add. 209.

[1498] 4. ok vas Geira son] om. A, B, add. 209.

[1499] 9. geck hann í skála, ok sá] B; þá sá hann, Cd.

[1500] 15. lagzt, Cd.

[1501] 7. enda] en, Cd.

[1502] 20. munzsofn, Cd.

[1503] 15. ...] the name of the place is missing; ... þar á bæ sem
hann var staddr, B.

[1504] 3. koerenn] B; kosenn, Cd.   þá til Alþ.] til Alþ. þá, Cd.

[1505] 12. Petrs-messo dag ... um síðer þ. kosninge] add. B; om. A.

[1506] 3. byscop] hann, Cd.

[1507] 4. lengr] lengi, Cd.

[1508] 5. við-f.] til fanga, B.

[1509] 8. fund] here begins a, first leaf.

[1510] 20. Petar] emend.; Pall, A, B.

[1511] 11. þrimr] a; þrem, A. ok Póls] add. B.

[1512] 16. es] add. a.

[1513] 17. hve títt v. m.] a; hve skiótt þurfte, A.

[1514] 18. skipaðr] Sama sumar fór hann til Íslanz með virðolegom
giaofom erkibyscops, ok hann hafðe út með ser gler-glugg þann sem enge
vas áðr iam-góðr fyrir í Scála-hollte, add. B.--And the same summer
he went to Iceland, having got worshipful gifts of the archbishop,
and took out with him a glass window fairer than any that had been
aforetime in Scal-holt.

[1515] 19. en þeir v.... byscope] add. a.

[1516] 2. enge] a; engan, Cd. þann ... hafa] a; þann hafa vígt, Cd.

[1517] 4. Pistola] a; pistle, Cd.

[1518] 10. noecqve] a; nockot, Cd.

[1519] 13. sá] a; sé, Cd.

[1520] 21. ferbyð, a.

[1521] 1. Ok es þeir] here ends the first leaf of a, the rest to the
end of the § is taken from B.

[1522] 7. næsta dag] A; B omits 'næsta dag.'

[1523] messo] this § 4 is taken from a and B. Sem sumraðe rézk Þ. í
skip ok lét í haf með sítt foro-neyti, ok varð vel reið-fara, ok tóko
þeir þar hofn sem þeir mundu kiósa, ok kom byscop heim í Sk. næsta
dag f. Laur. messo, A.

[1524] 6. þá] thus?

[1525] 20. Hann samðe ... messo-saong] add. B (382), om. A.

[1526] 1. þau orð] emend.; þær tíðer, Cd.

[1527] 6. B; homoiotel. in A from fiánda to fiánda.

[1528] 13. Þ. b. ástundaðe ... sætta] according to B; Þ. b. samþyckti
þá ok sætle, Cd.

[1529] 16. Iacob] emend.; Poll, Cd. (James i. 20).

[1530] vinnr] B; at eigi á saman v. G. ok r. m., Cd.

[1531] 9. pistola] so Cd. here.

[1532] 13. pistola] thus Cd.

[1533] 16. atgoerðom] góðom ráðom, Cd.

[1534] 19. lifande manna] add. B.

[1535] 6. hirte ríðe] thus Cd.

[1536] 9. eða fimm] (eða v.), add. B.

[1537] 6. Emend.; es gættu sína glæpe, Cd.; er sín gætto eige vel
sialfer, B.

[1538] 16. umb-] thus A.

[1539] 17. -láta] B; -líta, Cd.

[1540] 3. grætto] emend.; grædde, Cd.; harmaðe, B.

[1541] 6. alldrige] emend.; alla, Cd.

[1542] 20. rétt] here resumes the second leaf of a.

[1543] 22. aonnor] a; annat, Cd.

[1544] þau] a; þat, Cd.

[1545] 1. fóro] a; vóro, Cd.

[1546] 6. haofðingja] a; menn né h., Cd.

[1547] 10. ó-leyfðom] a; olyðnom, Cd.

[1548] 11. auðræðom] a; auðæfum, Cd.

[1549] 17. fóro] a; vóro, Cd.

[1550] 18. vilge] add. a.

[1551] 21. Imbro-] a; Ymbro-, Cd.

[1552] 4. níta] varna, a.

[1553] 8. sendo til] A here puts, in a manifest repetition of 11. 5,
the following: Þorlákr lét opt kenna kenningar; af þvi at hann sá
þat, þótt eige yrðe opt hlýtt svá skynsamlega sem skylde bók-sogom,
at þó dvalde þat þá únýtar gerðer fyr morgom monnom.

[1554] 12. líkara, a.

[1555] optazt] a; optar, Cd.

[1556] 15. þá es ... vinom sínom] add. a.

[1557] 16. brásc] a; brast, Cd.

[1558] 17. þá es gerðar beidde, a.

[1559] ú-vand-bloetr] a; úvand-látr, Cd.

[1560] 18. es dr. vóro] a; es dryckr var, Cd.

[1561] 19. es soemanda vas ok] add. a.

[1562] 2. a; homoiotel. in A, from aldrege to aldrege.

[1563] 3. alþýðo dryckjor, a.

[1564] 5. Þórl. bp.] here a ends.

[1565] 15. kynet ...] something seems to be missing here.

[1566] 18. habitavit, Cd.

[1567] 19. vætte] vente, Cd.

[1568] 21. Hann hende (hente, Cd.)

[1569] ... manna] B; Þ. bp. lét opt skemta bæðe sogom ok kvæðom,
kveðande ok horpo slætte; hann kende ok mikit gaman at aollo tale
því es hyggilegt vas, ok hann sá at til nockurrar nytsemðar kom;
varð hann af slíko ástsæll af ollom þeim er hiá vóro, B.

[1570] 11. The rest of the Saga is taken from B (AM.) 379, 382.

[1571] 8. Here B (382) resumes.

[1572] 18. sá þat] hafðe um stund þagat, AM. 379.

[1573] 4. Here two leaves are missing in B (382), the text taken from
AM. 379.

[1574] 11. Eða vilet ér or þ. klæðom ... aonnor klæðe] thus A, partly
mended (eða v. ér eige í þesse klæðe færðer vera, A); með svá l. m. sem
ér eroð; vel mon þat endaz, seger hann; var svá gort sem hann beidde,
ok endesk ..., B, a sort of homoiotel. (endezk vel).

[1575] 4. hné] A and B.

[1576] 7. ó-endelego] emend.; andlego, B.

[1577] 8. syner] A; viner, 379.

[1578] 9. ende, B.

[1579] 12. þau] þat, Cd.

[1580] 11. Þorlákr byscop andaðesk á Þórsdag einne nótt fyre
Ióla-aptan, A (St.).

[1581] 14. mclxxx ok vj] thus A (St.); þús-hundrat niotiger ok þriú
ár, efter tolo Dionisi, B.

[1582] 16. ij] AM. 219; ij, Cd.

[1583] 6. orða hans] seger sá er sogona setti, add. A; seger
sogo-meistarenn, B.

[1584] 10. Here 382 resumes.

[1585] 11. vættom] væntom, B.

[1586] 5. The ensuing battles, Northness 1181 and Sogn 1184, are
missing.

[1587] 9. Staðar-mennener ... Norðanlannz] instead of the last §, St.

[1588] Stockholm MS. reads:--The people of the see and men of this
country far and wide felt the death of the blessed bishop Thor-lac
grievously, inasmuch as they believed him to have been parted further
from men than it hath now proven: because there had never before
arisen a saint nor miracles of any man been shown forth in Iceland
before bishop Thor-lac's. Nevertheless, many men were comforted by
cheering dreams until God made manifest his miracles. Howbeit there
was a hard season and distress, only one bishop in the land, and he
a very old man, and war abrewing in the north of the country.

[1589] 5. foettr] 384; feitr, Cd.

[1590] 18. Emend.; kurteise lærdoms síns, Cd.

[1591] 19. -list] emend.; bóka lestri, Cd.

[1592] 3. hver-vetna, Cd.

[1593] þó] þá, Cd.

[1594] 5. Read þó.

[1595] 22. þá sýnde] thus?

[1596] 20. es þar] conj.; om. Cd.

[1597] 1. sá] þá, Cd.

[1598] 5. vanin, Cd.

[1599] 10. kosenn, Cd.

[1600] 12. ...] here something is missing.

[1601] 13. es] þegar, Cd.

[1602] 14. -byscopom] emend.; -byscope, Cd.

[1603] 2. ósen, Cd.

[1604] 13. Biorgvinar, Cd.

[1605] 14. -vígðz] emend.; vígðre, Cd.

[1606] 8. ok var honom, Cd.

[1607] 12. oeret nóg, Cd.

[1608] 20. ok hann, Cd.

[1609] 2. smíði, Cd.

[1610] 6. hvet-v.] Cd.

[1611] 16. því] þat, Cd.

[1612] 17. brícom] 384; kirkionne, Cd.

[1613] 20. crypt] emend.; groft, Cd.

[1614] 14. Emend.; at hann h. allra h. ok hina u. menn f. ser mest
um þetta atkvæde ok meðferð þessa máls, Cd.

[1615] 20. ok] om. Cd.

[1616] 5. berre] 384; þeirre, Cd.

[1617] 12. at] á, Cd.

[1618] 10. vætto] vænto, Cd.

[1619] 2. malme] 384; malan, Cd.

[1620] 4. lagðe] lagðesc, Cd.

[1621] 5. ogrynne, Cd.

[1622] 6. skrínis, Cd.

[1623] 17. mikenn crisma] 384; biscopar, Cd. (?).

[1624] 2. hvarge] emend.; hverge, Cd.

[1625] 12. at] add. 384. lengð] ok motto þat menn mikit ok kvaðust
under þat mál (sic), add. 384.

[1626] 13. ok Hallr] add. 384.

[1627] 1. Eiriks] emend.; Einars, Cd.

[1628] 12. saó 384; siá, Cd.

[1629] 13. æsto] æsktu, Cd.

[1630] 16. at skyldo] 384; hann þurfte, Cd.

[1631] 10. þá ... þat]? this is somehow wrong.

[1632] hiúkolfe] what is this?

[1633] 12. hann] 384; þat, Cd. ást-goðe] or ást-góðe, Cd.; astgoðr,
384.

[1634] 15. of líf] emend.; æve ok lífs, Cd.

[1635] 16. geta] emend.; gera, Cd.

[1636] 1. raoskoðosc] emend.; rostaðest, Cd. 5. í] add. 384.

[1637] 12. af orðet] read, á orðet?

[1638] 16. í allre] 384; allra, Cd.

[1639] 17. mála, es þaorf vas] emend.; manna es þar var, Cd.

[1640] 20. skilningom] thus; skill, handicraft?

[1641] 6. magne, Cd.

[1642] 19. kapellan, Cd.

[1643] 20. Sigfús prestr Gr.] add. by conj., see the following.

[1644] 3. prestr] add. 384.

[1645] 9. Sigfúse] 384; Sigfús, Cd.

[1646] 12. endi, Cd.

[1647] 15. býðr] or bíðr?

[1648] 16. bar at] emend.; bratt, Cd. (brat).

[1649] 10. svífande] emend.; snuande (i. e. sniuande), Cd.


[**ERROR: Contains unhandled entity &hstrok;]
[1650] 19. byscop] emend.; &hstrok; (&hstrok; = bp.), 384.


[**ERROR: Contains unhandled entity &thornstrok;]
[1651] Þorlák] emend.; &thornstrok;allt, Cd. (&thornstrok;allt for
&thornstrok;lac).

[1652] 23. at] add. by emend.; hennar h., Cd.

[1653] 24. vas] voro, Cd.

[1654] 3. at hann] þat hann, Cd.

[1655] 4. soema] 384; sæmda, Cd.

[1656] 7. virðe] 384; unde, Cd.

[1657] 10. dag enn fyrstan, Cd.

[1658] 14. glíkt] emend.; olikt, Cd. ('g' faded in archetypus).

[1659] 15. orð-vand.] emend.; auð-v., Cd.

[1660] kunnande] kunnu, Cd.

[1661] 19. nockor] emend.; nockut, Cd.

[1662] 6. Herm.] 384; Hamundar, Cd.

[1663] 7. cór] 384; conor(!), Cd.

[1664] 11. -oðosc (indic.), Cd.

[1665] 18.  ... ] something either missing or wrong.

[1666] 1. en m. ecki at goera] conj.; miok þeim ecka, 384,
Cd. (corrupt).

[1667] 3. ond-verðan, Cd.

[1668] 9. Somehow wrong.

[1669] 17. ...] corrupt; 'tvo goð,' Cd.; nockoð, 384. The text is
here unsafe.

[1670] 21. vine sína] conj.; limar sínar, Cd.

[1671] ...] something missing.

[1672] 1. stockðo (stucku) þeir, Cd., 384.

[1673] 3. víss] víss ok var, Cd.

[1674] 4. vilde vænta] ?

[1675] 6. lenge, Cd.

[1676] 8. hve] hvat, Cd.

[1677] 9. til efter-mála-vóro] emend.; þeim er efter voro, Cd.

[1678] 14. aðallega] conject.; naliga, Cd. (aþaliga).

[1679] 17. ...] something missing.

[1680] 18. sízt dofnaðr] corrupt; read, sáttar-stofnan ....?

[1681] 19. vas þess leitað] conj.; var leitað, Cd.; the text is
here unsafe.

[1682] 20. ynne] unne, Cd.

[1683] 4. hvárs] hvers, Cd.

[1684] 9. þá] þag, Cd.

[1685] 2. thus 384; homoiotel. in Cd. from þá-þá.


[**ERROR: Contains unhandled entity &hstrok;]
[1686] 17. byscop] 384 (bp.); hann (&hstrok;), Cd.

[1687] 22. semðe] sende, Cd.

[1688] 5. þyrftu, Cd.

[1689] 11. at] á, Cd.

[1690] 2. Emend.; einrænn, Cd.

[1691] 15. ok] emend.; om. Cd.

[1692] 17. élna] emend.; fella, Cd.

[1693] 7. drupnaðe, Cd.; driupte, 384.

[1694] 9. kvíðboge, 384 (mod. form).

[1695] 12. ber] emend.; her, Cd.

[1696] 15. Syndist, Cd.

[1697] 16. yfer] conj.; frá, Cd.

[1698] 20. hende] hendr, Cd.

[1699] 21. fal sik ok h.] en P. bp. bifalaðe (mod.) sik ok hana á
v. Alm. G. áðr hann v. f. o. k., Cd., but the clause is unsafe.

[1700] 3. ...] corrupt text; aðrer til veret, Cd.; for the supposed
sense see translation.

[1701] 12. Emend.; unaðs-samar, Cd.; unar-vister, 384.

[1702] 14. einkom] add. 384.

[1703] 21. dýrr Goðs] dýr geðr, Cd.

[1704] 22. sætt] emend.; sitt, Cd.

[1705] 23-24. Text partly unsafe.

[1706] 23. til] á, Cd. (at?).

[1707] 4. tveir v. ok t.] ij and xx, Cd.

[1708] 6. Ogmundr] en Þórgerðr móðer, add. Cd.

[1709] 17. efter] fyrer, B.

[1710] 5. Spá er spaks geta, C.

[1711] 23. átta] tolf, B.

[1712] 3. Íslenzker] B; virðoleger, Cd.

[1713] 11. B; Kollr, A.

[1714] 24. silki-bleikr á hárs-lit, C.

[1715] 20. vonum, Cd.

[1716] 2. koemr] add. Cd.

[1717] 2. -skemle] 225; -skefle, Cd.

[1718] 9. stilte strengena til slagar, C.

[1719] 9. þickjaz, Cd.

[1720] 17. lxx] B, AM. 219; Cd. Holm. 5. om. 'lxx;' A (234) reduces
it to the ordinary chronology, 'þúsund ára ok átta tiger.'

[1721] 1. sá es] Hilarius hét ok Illoge oðro nafne, B.

[1722] ok var Biarnar son] add. C.

[1723] 10. manna] Fór sá same Hilarius síðan í Vestr-hóp til
Breiða-bólstaðar, ok hvíler hans líkame þar, en onden með Goðe í
eilífom fagnaðe.--Laurent. Saga, ch. 2.

[1724] 15. ok t. h. við hónom] add. 235.

[1725] 6. vænta, Cd.

[1726] 12. upp] here ends AM. 235.

[1727] 18. B here adds after the bishop has parted from the
archbishop--fór hann fyrst til Noregs, sýslande ser þar kirkju-við,
ok þat sama sumar lætr hann í haf, ok verðr vel reiðfara, ok kemr
skip þat á Eyrar fyr sunnan land; and farther below--(sitjande heima
um vetrenn at stóle sínom) en frændr hans ok viner flutto sunnan frá
skipe kirkju-við hans í Vinverjadal, en Norðlendingar gerðo þegar
efter ok drógo heim til Hóla (certainly unhistorical).

[1728] 4. at] B; ok, Cd.

[1729] 11. ok vas Gamla son] add. B.

[1730] 21. ok enn ... húsanna] apparently 14th-century gloss.

[1731] 9. sé] seae, Cd.

[1732] 24. Deum] ok Mariu vers, add. B.

[1733] 1. epter því ... Goð mínn] add. B.

[1734] 6. lúkem] Cd.

[1735] 17. Týrs-dag] add. B.

[1736] 18. ok svá ... svá út] add. B.

[1737] 11. De Arte] B; epistolarum, Cd.

B adds:--En í þeirre bók talar meistare Ovidius um kvenna-áster, ok
kenner með hverjom hætte menn skolo þær gilja, ok nálgaz þeirra vilja.

And in this book master Ovidius talketh of the love of women, and
teacheth in what ways men may beguile them and get their will of them.

[1738] 15. dictom] B; siðom, A.



C (AM. 392) has a third recension of § 4:--Leikr ... í þann
tíma er heldr var ó-fagr, at bera bottatillde (read bottafilde),
þar skylde karlmaðr kveða at kono ... vísor ó-tilheyrilegar með
mansongs sneið-yrðe ok sám-yrðe. A play *** at that time that was
very unseemly, to carry on butt-fillings, wherein the man recited to
the woman licentious verses not fit to be heard, with insinuations
of love and foul words.

[1739] 9. syne, Cd.

[1740] 10. es Valdís hét] add. 392.

[1741] 12. afi] foðor-faðer, B.

[1742] 13. mále] viz. in the Miracle Book appended, but not given here.

[1743] 2. fóta s. h. for-ráð] B; fong hefðe á, Cd. um sinn] B; til
sín, Cd.

[1744] 16. einn franzeis] add. B.

[1745] 13. eige] here falls in the interpolation of miracles.

[1746] 16. ísar m. ok] add. B.

[1747] 1. haf-ísar, B.

[1748] 10. hónom] emend.; þeim, Cd.

[1749] 11. ó-tyttr] B; ónýtr, Cd.

[1750] 19. fóstre Ioans biskups frá dauða foðor hans, C.

[1751] 21. þá] þar, Cd.

[1752] 14. kosenn, Cd.

[1753] 15. mc.ix (for mc.xi), B.

[1754] 1. á crosse ... heiter] add. 392 (wr. Bericho).

[1755] 5. skeklto, Cd.

[1756] 16. ***] an inserted § (ch. 20 of the old edition) is a gloss,
containing repetitions.

[1757] 2. meðan ... mæle] add. C.

[1758] 19. xiiij] B and C; xxi, Cd.

[1759] 4. roekilega] en er kisto skylde gera at líkeno, þá var
at þeirre smíð klerkr sá er Brandr hét, ok var Bergþórs son: hann
skeindezt....

But when the coffin was made for the body, it was a clerk named Brand
who was the son of Bergthor that was to do the work. He cut himself
deeply in the hand so that his finger was nearly off, and after that
he had it bound in a linen [bandage], for it bled much, as it was
like to do, but yet he would not give up the work till the coffin
was finished. After that he arrayed the bishop's body along with
other clerks and toiled thereat with great care. And three nights
later his hand was unbound, and the sore was then healed, and men
could see where the wound had been as it were a red thread left,
and all praised God that saw this token.

[1760] 18. ok lá ... pall.] add. C.

[1761] 4. fyrer útan ... syðra] add. B.

[1762] 14. Þetta veite ...] add. C.

[1763] 22. vóðo] emend.; voro, Cd.

[1764] 21. Hallbiaorn] C (see Sturl. i. p. 189); Halldórr, Cd.

[1765] 19. epter siðvenjo] add. C.

[1766] 13. ...] something is missing here.

[1767] 7. Two leaves missing in 382.

[1768] 7. AM. 382 resumes.

[1769] 16. penga, Cd.

[1770] 11. Af Sveini uheppna, inscr. in 382.

[1771] 22. stund] C; skamt, Cd.

[1772] 3. var] blank of six leaves lost in 382.

[1773] 16. ...] something is here missing.

[1774] 19. var] er, Cd.

[1775] sloema] emend.; dæma, Cd.?

[1776] 16. fötuðu, Cd.

[1777] 19. Reið] emend.; Beið, Cd.

[1778] 20. í Leiro-b.] om. Cd.

[1779] 8. Bað-g.] thus here.

[1780] 5. til víst] thus.

[1781] 7. Emend.; þessum bið-stole, Cd.

[1782] 18. um-bötun, Cd.

[1783] 19. Hlíta] emend.; heita, Cd.

[1784] 14. lyser, Cd.

[1785] 3. Thus; read, hófuzt?

[1786] 6. rædde] emend. (or réd); rétte, Cd.

[1787] 5. ero þer, Cd.

[1788] 21. Hkr.; helgom domom, Cd.

[1789] 1. æ síðan] H; er mestr, M.

[1790] The text, resting on a single MS., is here at fault; the
bearing is clearly as above. Cetil came of the Madder-weald House.

[1791] Missing in the text.

[1792] Cp. the following excerpts from Sir John Halldórsson's Lives
of Bishops in MSS.:--

Anno 1588.--Hofuðs-maðrenn bað hann (Guðbrand) koma til Alþinges til
góðra ráða og tillaga um biskups kosning.

Anno 1631.--Var Sr Gísle af morgum nefndr til biskups kosningar í
Skálholte efter föður sínn, og síðan á Alþingi fullkomlega kosinn.

Anno 1631.--Kom hann (Bryniolfr) enn í Skálholt fyrir Alþing ... þó
Vestfirðingar vilde kiósa hann þá til biskups, samt feck það ecki
framgang (he was elected seven years later).

Anno 1627.--Þann 20 Augusti á Flugumýrar presta-stefnu snerust vel
flester Norðlendingar á eitt ráð ... og kusu til biskups Sr Þorlák
Skúlason.

Anno 1656.--Á Flugumýre í Skagafirðe var haldenn almennilegr
presta-samfundr úr Hóla-stipte um biskups kosningu, og var Gísle
Þorláks son þá kosenn til biskups í stað föður síns, sá seinaste
biskup af Almenninge kosenn her á lande.

[1793] There is a double account, the same or the next summer; we
give the preference to the former.

[1794] Þá fóro útan á Eyrom þeir Magnusson Goðmundar son gríss--hann
var kosenn til byskops í Scálaholte--ok Kygri-Beorn es Norðlendingar
hofðu koeret til byskops.--Sturl. i. 426, cp. also Bisk. S. ii. 185,
186.

[1795] um tolo, A; corrupted, we think, from 'án (ón) tolo;' om. a.

[1796] Whom we suppose to be the writer of this narrative, later
abbot of Hitardale.

[1797] [  ] add. a.

[1798] Godmund and Ogmund used to play together and many other
children with them. But their games and play always ended the same
way, however they began. Godmund got the mitre and staff and chalice,
church and altar, and was the bishop in their play, and Ogmund got
axe and shield and weapon, and was the warrior. And this seemed to
men to be a great omen of what was to come, when there happened to
each of them what was fated.--The Saga in an earlier part.

[1799] vegr, A and a (?).

[1800] Mariu-messa fyrre and síðare mean in the Sagas the 15th Aug. and
8th Sept. respectively, but in the Charters (term for lighting the
churches) the 2 Feb. and 25 March.

[1801] Enacted at the All-moot 1199, on June 29th, the anniversary
of his election at the Moot 1174.

[1802] Enacted at the All-moot 1326.

[1803] Dýre-d. enacted at the All-moot 1326.

[1804] After 1271 the All-moot was moved, and met June 29, so that
July 2 fell within the first Moot-week.

[1805] But in Bp. Arne's Saga, Bisk. Sogor, i. p. 715, S. Swithun
means 2nd July, as may be seen from the context. Bp. Arne having
been present at the king's coronation on S. Swithun's-day, started
for Iceland on S. Olave's-day, 3rd Aug.

[1806] Enacted at the All-moot 1237.

[1807] Cf. IV Conc. Orleans, c. 33, A.D. 541: 'Si quis in agro suo aut
habet aut postulet dioecesim primum et terras ei deputet sufficienter
et clericos qui ibidem sua officia impleant.' See Bright's Early
English Church History, Note F.

[1808] D. 12.--'Allt það sem her er fyrir skrifað í þessare bók
hefeg Biarne Marteins son skrifað eftir gaomlum Máldaga-kverum og
Máldaga-bloðum léttum og gódum í Skálholte, anno 1601 um skamdeige.'

[1809] AM. 263.--'Samanskrifuð eftir gomlum máldogum 1598.'

[1810] Dr. Cederschiold, in his little study on the older Icelandic
Church Charters, 1887, gave a list of Saints to which churches were
dedicated in the Middle Ages in Iceland, drawn from charters mostly
of the 13th century; but it is difficult to get a list at all complete
or even representative, because it was the custom to dedicate churches
to several saints, and because very little information is forthcoming
for many churches. Dr. Cederschiold's list includes:--


The Trinity.
Christ.
Mary Mother of God.
Apostle Peter.
Apostle Andrew.
Apostle James.
Apostle John.
Apostle Paul.
S. John Baptist.
S. Stephen.
S. Nicholas, bishop.
S. Martin, bishop.
S. Clement.
S. Laurence.
S. Germanus.
S. Gallus.
S. Sebastian.
S. Vincent, deacon.
S. Blaise, bishop.
S. Augustin.
S. Denis.
S. Thorlac, bishop.
S. Olave, King and Martyr.
S. Mary Magdalen.
Eleven Thousand Virgins.
S. Agnes.
S. Agatha.
S. Barbara.
S. Lucy.
All Hallows.


[1811] Text not safe.

[1812] eige] om. Cd.

[1813] [   ] a later addition. The charter is much older than the
date 1170 in D. 1. See Ldn.

[1814] The text is here corrupt; for hefðe fiar ráð read hefðe fund.

[1815] Read eyjar for eyrar.

[1816] Þing, Cd.

[1817] Testimony sworn on the Rood.

[1818] 2. ss.] f., Cd.

[1819] 12. Herdis, Cd.

[1820] 11. Should be, f. Ulfs orgoða, f. Svartz.

[1821] 1. Iodísar] emend, according to line 8; Godunar, M*.

[1822] 2. Markus] emend.; Magnus, M*.

[1823] 3. Alfgerðar] read Alfeiðar.

[1824] 4. f. Herd.] emend.; z Herd., M*.

[1825] 8. Markus] emend.; Magnus, M*.

[1826] 34. Hallz] Haralldz, vell.

[1827] 41. Emend.; Þorláks prestz z Ketils, M*.

[1828] 50. Biorns, M*.

[1829] 6. Þóroddz] emend.; Þorolfs, M*.

[1830] 23. Gríms, f.] om. Cd.

[1831] 43. m. Surtz] emend.; systir M*.

